Scope 2 Implementation Plan: Network
Interfaces & Connectivity Evaluation

Overview & Scope Objectives

Scope 2 extends the constellation simulator’s core (established in Scope 1) to model network interfaces
on each node and evaluate connectivity in real-time. Building on the  Scope 1 foundation – which
provided moving platforms, attached network nodes, and a time-stepped simulation loop – this phase
introduces  NetworkInterface objects for every network node and implements basic link modeling
(wired  and  wireless)  between  interfaces.  The  goal  is  a  simulator  that  represents  each  node’s
communication interfaces (antennas, radios, ports) and can determine which links are geometrically
possible (line-of-sight) at any given time
. This will produce a dynamic  connectivity graph that
updates as satellites move, laying the groundwork for higher-layer networking logic in later scopes
.
In summary, Scope 2 will: 

Extend the data model to include multiple NetworkInterface entries per NetworkNode (wired
and wireless interfaces)
. 
Define TransceiverModel specifications for wireless interfaces (frequency bands, antenna
parameters, power, sensitivity, etc.)
. 
Implement wired link support (e.g. fiber/Ethernet) with static always-on connectivity (fixed
latency, no line-of-sight needed)
. 
Implement wireless link connectivity checks: compute line-of-sight availability for satellite-to-
ground and inter-satellite links each simulation tick. Apply horizon angle constraints for ground
stations and Earth occlusion checks for space-space links. 
Assume omni-directional coverage by default (no antenna pointing limits yet) and optionally
enforce a max range if specified
. 
Produce a rudimentary time-varying connectivity map (which links are available vs. not) that can
be queried or logged. No actual traffic or scheduling is simulated yet – links are considered “up”
if geometry allows, but no control-plane actions (beam steering or routing) are required in this
scope. 

This implementation plan details the new modules, data structures, interfaces, and algorithms to be
added in Scope 2, and how they integrate with the Scope 1 architecture. We also outline the exhaustive
tests (test-driven development) that will validate each part, and recommend libraries/protocols to use.
The  design  emphasizes  extensibility and  alignment  with  Aalyria  Spacetime’s  APIs  and  concepts,
ensuring we maintain world-class architectural rigor as we expand the simulator.

Architectural Context & Extension of Scope 1

Scope 1 established the core simulation architecture: -  PlatformDefinition (physical platform with
orbital/or geographic motion) and NetworkNode (logical node attached to a platform or standalone)
data models. - A central Knowledge Base (KB) as the state store for all entities (platforms, nodes, etc.),
supporting thread-safe updates and queries. - A Simulation Time Controller (time-step loop) driving
periodic updates (e.g. propagating satellite positions via SGP4). - Orbit Propagation & Motion Models
(using an SGP4 library for orbital updates and supporting static or scripted motion for ground/air

1

2

• 

3

• 

4
5

• 

6
7

• 

• 

8

• 

1


--- Page Break ---

nodes)
. - Basic fields like node type tags, power budget, and storage capacity were included as
placeholders (not enforced in Scope 1)
.

Scope  2  builds  directly  on  this  foundation.  The  new  network  interface  and  link  concepts  will  be
integrated  such  that:  -  Data  Model:  NetworkNode  is  extended  to  contain  a  collection  of
NetworkInterfaces. We will augment the existing data classes (or database schema) with interface-
related tables/fields. This preserves backward compatibility: nodes without interfaces (from Scope 1
scenarios) remain valid, and new scenarios can populate interfaces as needed. - Knowledge Base: Will
maintain not just platform and node states, but also interface and link states. The KB’s API will be
extended (e.g. KB.get_interfaces(node_id) , KB.get_link(link_id)  etc.) to retrieve interface

details and link status. All additions will follow the concurrency and atomicity model set in Scope 1’s KB
design
 – e.g. updates to link availability are done in a thread-safe manner at each tick, and can
trigger notifications if a subscription mechanism exists (the subscription/pub-sub concept introduced in
Scope 1 will be expanded to cover link state changes as well
). - Simulation Loop Integration: After
the time controller advances simulation time and updates all platform positions (Scope 1 behavior), a
new  Connectivity  Evaluation  step will  run.  This  step  iterates  over  relevant  interface  pairs  or
predefined links and computes which links are currently  available (geometrically achievable). This
result is written to the Knowledge Base (updating each link’s status). The time controller will maintain
modularity
 
by
 
calling
 
an
 
interface
 
of
 
the
 
connectivity
 
module
 
(e.g.

ConnectivityService.updateAllLinks(current_time) ),  keeping  physics  propagation  and

connectivity logic decoupled. - Module Structure: We introduce a Connectivity Service component (or
module) responsible for evaluating link conditions. This service encapsulates the geometry calculations
and link state management, providing clean interfaces for the simulation loop to invoke. It uses data
from PlatformDefinition (positions), NetworkInterface (types and parameters), and TransceiverModel
(for any constraints) to decide link availability. By isolating this in a service, we uphold a separation of
concerns: orbital updates (Scope 1) vs. connectivity computation (Scope 2). This also makes it easier to
extend or optimize connectivity logic later (e.g. precomputing contact windows, adding interference or
link budget calculations in future scopes)
.

Overall, Scope 2’s additions are designed to be additive and modular. The core architecture (entities,
KB, time loop) remains in place; we are plugging in new data structures and logic in a way that future
scopes (which will add scheduling, traffic, etc.) can build upon without refactoring. All new classes and
functions will be documented and structured for clarity, following the same coding standards and
patterns established in Scope 1. This ensures consistency and a smooth transition for developers
continuing from Scope 1 to implement Scope 2 features.

Data Model Enhancements

NetworkInterface Data Model

We introduce a NetworkInterface class (or struct) to represent each communication interface (port,
antenna, radio, etc.) on a NetworkNode. Each NetworkNode can have 0 or more NetworkInterfaces
,
allowing us to model multi-homed nodes (e.g. a satellite with multiple radios, or a ground station with
both an RF antenna and a fiber backhaul). Key attributes of the NetworkInterface model:

Interface Identity: Every NetworkInterface has a unique interface_id that is unique within its
parent node, plus a human-readable name. The combination  {node_id, interface_id}

serves as a globally unique identifier for the interface
. For example, node “node_gw_1” might
have interfaces “if0” (satellite dish) and “if1” (fiber port). We will maintain this composite ID for
lookups and refer to interfaces in link definitions by this composite ID. In addition, we store

9
10

11
12

13

14

15

16

• 

17

2


--- Page Break ---

optional addressing info: MAC address (if applicable) and an IP address (IPv4/IPv6 in CIDR
notation) for future networking use
. These fields allow integration with routing and flow
simulation later – e.g. the IP addresses can be used by a future routing algorithm to identify
subnets or classify traffic flows to interfaces.

Interface Type (Medium): Each interface is categorized as either Wired or Wireless (we model
this via a oneof/enum field medium_type , or subclassing in an OOP language)
:

WiredInterface: Represents a tethered link such as an Ethernet port, fiber optic cable, or any
fixed point-to-point link that does not require propagation through free space. Key properties: 

max_data_rate  – the maximum bandwidth capacity in bits per second
. This is a

static cap; it will be used later when simulating traffic to not exceed link capacity. For now,
we store it and can use it to compute theoretical throughput or simply log it.

associated_platform  (optional) – a reference to a Platform ID if this cable/port is

associated with a physical platform or location
. This is mainly metadata for
visualization (e.g., if modeling a subsea fiber, one might attach it to the two shore station
platforms). In our simulation logic, this field has no effect on connectivity (wired links are
assumed direct connections), but we store it for completeness and future use (e.g., export
to visualization or mapping tools).
Latency – by default, we will assume a fixed propagation latency for wired links. We can
allow a configuration per link or a global default (e.g. all terrestrial fiber links = 5 ms). This
can be stored as a property (in the link or interface, see Link model below) and used when
simulating packet delays in the future. In Scope 2, latency values are noted but since we
aren’t simulating actual packet flow, this will not affect any outcome; it’s essentially
informational or for later use.
Availability – Wired interfaces/links are assumed to be always “up” unless explicitly
taken down. We do not compute line-of-sight for wired links
. In other words, if two
nodes are connected by a wired link (like a fiber), we treat it as continuously available
(100% connectivity) by default. The only exceptions could be if an impairment is specified
(e.g. user simulating a fiber cut). We will incorporate a mechanism to mark interfaces or
links as failed or down (operational impairment), but by default in Scope 2 no such events
are generated – the link stays up indefinitely
.

WirelessInterface: Represents a radio transceiver (e.g. an RF antenna, optical comm terminal,
etc.) that can form links through free-space propagation. Each Wireless interface will contain:

A reference to a Transceiver Model (see next section) that defines its RF/optical
characteristics
. We store this as a transceiver_model_id  or pointer, linking to a

library of transceiver specifications. This allows multiple interfaces to share the same
model (e.g. many satellites using a “generic LEO Ku-band antenna” model). In the Aalyria
Spacetime context, transceiver hardware specs reside in an “SDN Store” database
; for
our simulator, we will implement a simplified internal store or static list of models. 
Parameters from TransceiverModel (copied or referenced): frequency band, antenna
gain pattern, transmitter power, receiver sensitivity, polarization, etc. (detailed in
TransceiverModel section below)
. Some of these may also be directly accessible via
the interface for quick checks (e.g. frequency band might be needed to decide
compatibility between two interfaces).
Link budget status: we will include fields to hold dynamic link metrics (signal-to-noise
ratio, current data rate, etc.), though in Scope 2 these will mostly remain unpopulated/
stubbed. We design the interface class with placeholders for link budget results so that in

17

• 

18

• 

◦ 
19

◦ 

20

◦ 

◦ 

7

7

• 

◦ 

21

22

◦ 

23

◦ 

3


--- Page Break ---

Scope 3+ we can fill them. For example, a wireless interface could have a method 

computeLinkBudget(other_interface)  or a field like last_snr  or 

link_quality  that the Connectivity Service can update once we implement link

budget calculations. In this scope, if a link is line-of-sight, we might mark it as “available”
but not calculate an SNR or throughput – those would come in later scopes. We do,
however, plan to log distance or elevation angle for debug, which can later feed into link
budget formulas.
Operational status: A wireless interface can be disabled or impaired. We will support an

operational_state  or impairment  flag/list (aligned with the Spacetime NBI’s 

operational_impairment  field for NetworkInterface)
. By default interfaces are

enabled; an impairment (e.g. hardware failure) can be set via scenario or API to force the
interface (and thus any link using it) to be down regardless of geometry. In Scope 2, we
will not generate impairments spontaneously, but the user could specify one in scenario
config for testing (or toggle via an API call if available). Our connectivity logic will honor
this: if an interface is marked down, any link involving it will be treated as unavailable
(even if line-of-sight is present)
. This gives us a manual override to simulate failures.
We’ll implement the impairment as a simple boolean or enum state on the interface (or
an entry in a list of impairments as per the proto). A test will cover that toggling this state
affects connectivity (see Testing section).

In  implementing  NetworkInterface,  we  will  ensure  it  aligns  with  the  Aalyria  API  structures.  The
aalyria.api.nbi protos define NetworkInterface  with fields like id, name, medium (wired/wireless),

and for wireless, nested WirelessDevice  with transceiver and hardware chain IDs, etc. We will use

similar field naming and typing so that integration or translation is straightforward. Notably, we include:
interface id  and name , mac_address  (if needed), ip_address , an enum for medium type, and

then either a wired  struct or wireless  struct. In code, this could be represented by subclasses or a

union type. The physical hardware chain IDs (like port, antenna ID in NMTS) that Spacetime tracks
will be acknowledged but not deeply used – we may store them if provided, but our simulation doesn’t
detail internal hardware elements. The design will not preclude capturing those IDs, to stay extensible.

Additionally, the NetworkInterface will have methods or computed properties for convenience, e.g.: -

getGlobalId()  –  returns  a  string  or  tuple  of  {node_id,  interface_id} .  -  Possibly,

isWireless()  / isWired()  helpers (or based on class type). - For Wireless: maybe a method to get

its current position. Since a NetworkInterface itself is attached to a node (and hence a platform via the
node), it doesn’t have an independent position; it uses its platform’s position. But if in future we allow
positional offset (like an antenna on a large platform at a certain offset), we might incorporate that. In
Scope 2, it’s enough to assume interface position = node’s platform position for geometry. We will note
this assumption.

Multiple Interfaces per Node: Our data model and KB will be designed to handle nodes with more
than one interface. For example, a ground station node might have one wireless interface (satellite
dish) and one wired interface (backhaul fiber). We will store interfaces in a collection (list or map) within
the NetworkNode object, keyed by interface_id. All interfaces on a node share the node’s unique
node_id  namespace  for  interface  IDs.  We  will  implement  utility  functions  like

node.addInterface(interface)  which registers a new interface and ensures no duplicate ID on

that node. If a duplicate is attempted, it will throw an error or refuse to add (error handling as part of
scenario validation). We will test that multiple interfaces can be added and retrieved correctly. This
multi-interface support sets the stage for more complex networking in later scopes (e.g. a satellite
acting as a bent-pipe relay might have one interface for user links and another for feeder link to a
gateway).

◦ 

24

25

26

4


--- Page Break ---

TransceiverModel Specification

To  support  wireless  interfaces,  we  define  a  TransceiverModel class  (or  data  structure)  that
encapsulates the radio frequency (RF) or optical communication parameters of an interface. In Aalyria’s

architecture, transceiver models are stored in a central repository and referenced by ID
. We will
implement a simplified version: a static registry of transceiver model definitions that can be loaded at
startup or scenario load.

Each TransceiverModel will include at minimum the following fields (consistent with the requirements)
: - Model ID and Name: A unique identifier (string or GUID) for the model, and a descriptive name
(e.g. “Generic Ku-Band SATCOM Antenna”). - Frequency Band: The operating frequency or band (e.g.
“Ku band 12–14 GHz” or optical 1550 nm). This could be a simple label and/or numeric range. We might
represent it as a center frequency plus bandwidth, or a set of discrete bands. For simplicity, we can
store an approximate frequency range in Hz. This will be used to ensure that two wireless interfaces can
only form a link if they share a common band (for now, we assume scenario designers only connect
compatible interfaces, but we include the data for validation). In the future, frequency could affect
propagation (e.g. atmospheric attenuation), but not in Scope 2. - Antenna Gain Pattern: An antenna
gain profile or beamwidth. This can be represented in various ways – e.g., a simple beamwidth angle
(half-power beamwidth) for an idealized directional antenna, or a gain vs. off-boresight angle table.
Initially, we will  simplify to an omnidirectional or wide-beam assumption for all models unless
specified otherwise
. We may still include a field for beamwidth or gain pattern (perhaps as a
reference  to  a  file  or  a  formula)  to  keep  the  model  extensible.  For  example,  we  might  have:  -

beamwidth_deg  (e.g. 180° to indicate hemispherical coverage, or smaller if we want to simulate a

steerable narrow beam). - A placeholder for an antenna gain pattern lookup (could be a list of gain vs
angle or a formula). By default, our example models will use an isotropic pattern (0 dBi gain in all
directions) or a fixed moderate gain with a wide beam (to avoid needing to simulate pointing). This
means if line-of-sight exists geometrically, we assume the antenna can point and communicate (no
narrow pointing constraints yet). - Transmit Power / EIRP: The emitted power. This can be given as EIRP
(Effective Isotropic Radiated Power) which already factors antenna gain, or as a raw RF power plus
separate antenna gain. We will likely store an  EIRP (dBW or dBm) to simplify. E.g., a smallsat radio
might have 30 dBw EIRP. We also store a Receiver sensitivity/G/T: e.g. noise figure or G/T (gain over
noise temperature) which indicates how well the antenna can receive. These parameters are critical for
link budget calculations (Scope 3), but we include them now in the model so that as soon as we
implement link budget, the data is there
. For now, these values won’t affect link availability – they
will be used later to calculate if the link quality is sufficient. We will possibly use them in Scope 2 only to
log an  estimated link margin when a link is available, as an informational output. -  Supported
Modulation/Coding Modes: A list of supported waveform modes or modem standards (e.g. “DVB-S2X
QPSK 1/2”, “Custom Optical Mode1”). The Aalyria API enumerates some standard modes in RadioConfig
(like DVB-S2X, DVB-RCS2, etc.)
. We will include a field (e.g. supported_modes ) as a list of enums or

strings representing these modes. Initially, this is not used in simulation logic, but it will allow us to
select a modulation in the future to determine data rate. In Scope 2, we might simply record a default
mode (e.g. assume highest rate mode) for each model and maybe an indicative max data rate (to use as
link capacity). For example, if a transceiver model corresponds to a 100 MHz bandwidth QPSK link, we
might say it supports up to 100 Mbps. This can double as the link’s capacity if needed (similar to

max_data_rate  for wired). - Polarization: e.g. linear, circular, etc., if relevant. This likely won’t play a

role in our sim, but we note it for completeness (to avoid connecting incompatible polarizations if that
were a factor; in most cases, we assume matching). - Pointing/Steering limits: We can have fields such
as  max_pointing_angle  or  gimbal_limit  to indicate how far the antenna can steer from its

boresight or if it’s fixed. In Scope 2, we assume full hemispherical coverage (the antenna can cover all
sky above the platform), so effectively no limit within 180° view. But we include a placeholder – for
instance, if an optical terminal has a limited cone, or if a ground antenna cannot point below a certain

21

5

8

5

27

5


--- Page Break ---

elevation (which we handle via min elevation on the ground side separately). We may treat ground
station antenna elevation limits separately (see below). - Link Establishment Time: Some models might
have  a  lock-on  time  (how  quickly  it  can  acquire  a  target).  The  requirements  mention  a

link_establishment_timeout  that should be respected by scheduling algorithms
. In Scope 2,

we will store this field (in seconds) if provided, but we will not actively simulate timing delays for link
acquisition. We simply assume if geometry allows, the link is considered available. This timeout will
come into play in Scope 4 when we simulate beam scheduling (if a beam command is issued, it might
need some lead time to lock on). For now, we keep the data to not lose sight of the feature. - Hardware
Chain IDs: Spacetime’s WirelessDevice includes fields like platform_id, antenna_id, modulator_id, etc.
(references to the NMTS hardware graph)
. Our TransceiverModel might include analogous IDs or
just ignore them. Since our simulation does not model hardware at that granularity, we will  ignore
NMTS IDs except to possibly store them if needed for API compliance. They won’t affect simulation
behavior.

Example  Transceiver  Models:  We  will  define  a  few  representative  models  to  use  in  testing  and
scenarios: - LEO_Satellite_KuBand: Frequency ~12 GHz, beamwidth ~180° (omni), EIRP ~40 dBw, G/T ~–
20  dB/K,  supports  QPSK/16QAM  modes,  polarization  linear.  Represents  a  generic  low-gain  omni
antenna on a LEO satellite. Max range ~? (LEO to ground ~2000 km, we won’t enforce range for RF
beyond LoS). - GroundStation_KuBand_Dish: Frequency ~12 GHz (to pair with above), narrow beam (we
might still set 180° for simplicity now, but note it’s steerable), high gain (antenna gain ~30 dBi, so EIRP
depends on power but overall maybe 60–70 dBw EIRP), G/T ~10 dB/K (larger dish), supports same
modes. This represents a tracking dish on the ground. We’ll give it a min elevation angle of e.g. 5°. -
Optical_ISL_Terminal: Frequency ~193 THz (1550 nm optical), very narrow beam (say 0.1°), high data rate
potential. We can use this to illustrate another interface type (though we won’t fully simulate beam
pointing; if used, we’d assume the scenario ensures alignment). This is mostly placeholder for future
scope (Scope 5+ might incorporate optical). -  Fiber1Gbps: This is actually a wired model, but we can
include in a common registry for convenience: capacity 1 Gbps, fixed latency default 5 ms, etc. (This
might belong in link config rather than transceiver, since transceiver is for wireless, but we might
generalize the concept to “link model” for wired as well).

These models can be defined in a JSON or Python dictionary for easy loading. The simulator will load
default models at startup (or scenario can include model definitions). The NetworkInterfaces in scenario
will  reference  these  by  model_id.  The  design  ensures  that  adding  new  models  (community
contributions, specific antenna patterns, etc.) is straightforward – one can extend the model list without
altering core code, as long as the fields are consistent.

Network Link Modeling

In Scope 2, we introduce  NetworkLink objects to represent connectivity between two interfaces. In
Spacetime’s NBI, links can be unidirectional or bidirectional
. We will support both, focusing on the
minimal structure needed now (with geometry-based availability). The NetworkLink model will include:

Link ID and Type: Each link will have a unique identifier and a type designator (unidirectional vs.
bidirectional). We expect scenario input to specify links. For convenience, we might allow two
notations:
Directional link: specified with a source interface and a destination interface (one-way). We will
model this with a NetworkLink  class having src_iface_id  and dst_iface_id  fields

(each being the global interface ID of each end)
. Directional links carry traffic one-way – e.g.
a downlink from sat -> ground.
Bidirectional link: a link that is logically two-way between the same pair of nodes. In
implementation, we can either have a separate BidirectionalLink  class containing two 

28

26

29

• 

• 

30

• 

6


--- Page Break ---

NetworkLink  (one for each direction), or we simply treat a bidirectional link as an umbrella

that generates two internal directional links. The Aalyria proto has a BidirectionalLink message
grouping two LinkEnds
. We will likely mirror that: our BidirectionalLink  object will

have end_a_iface  and end_b_iface . For simulation purposes, we will instantiate two

directional links under the hood (A->B and B->A) and tie them together (so they share common
properties like availability – which in a symmetric environment will be the same in both
directions for line-of-sight). This simplifies reuse of the connectivity logic (which can be written
for a directional link). We’ll ensure that if one end’s geometry is blocked, both directions are
marked down. Essentially, bidirectional = two directional links that must go up/down together in
our simplified physical model (since line-of-sight is mutual).

We assign link IDs accordingly, e.g. a bidirectional link might have an ID “link1” and internally we
tag the directional components as “link1_AtoB” and “link1_BtoA” or similar. However, in output or
API we may report just one link with state = available if either direction can transmit? Actually,
since we assume symmetric line-of-sight, available is same both ways. We’ll handle the internal
representation carefully to avoid duplication in reports.

Endpoint references: Each link references exactly two interface endpoints (even a directional
link still implicitly involves two interfaces – one src, one dst). We will store references or IDs for
these. Possibly we also store the parent node IDs for convenience (though we can derive from
interface IDs). This makes it easy to query, e.g., “list all links involving node X”.

Link Medium and Properties: The properties of a link largely derive from the interfaces:

If both endpoints are wired interfaces, the link is considered a wired link. For these, we may
store a fixed latency and capacity. We can derive capacity as the min of the two interface’s
max_data_rate (assuming the link can’t exceed either port’s capability). We’ll also allow the
scenario to explicitly specify a link bandwidth or latency if needed (overriding defaults). But
essentially, a wired link is up 100% unless manually taken down.

If either endpoint is wireless (in practice, both should be wireless for a valid wireless link – we
won’t link a wireless directly to a wired without an intermediate node), then the link is a wireless
link subject to line-of-sight and other RF conditions. For wireless links, we will store:

Frequency/band: We might define the link’s operating frequency. Ideally, the link
frequency should match the interfaces’ frequency band. If the two interfaces have
overlapping bands (e.g. both are Ku-band), we consider the link’s frequency that band. If
not, the link is not actually feasible; our code will check compatibility. We’ll implement a 
band compatibility check on link creation: if the interfaces have totally disjoint
frequency ranges, we will log a warning or error, since that link wouldn’t work.
(Alternatively, scenario simply wouldn’t define such a link. We assume correct input but
include a safeguard.)
Polarization or other radio config: not heavily used now, but stored if provided.
A placeholder for Link budget parameters: e.g. free-space path loss, current SNR, etc. In
Scope 2, when a link is line-of-sight, we may compute the distance and possibly calculate
a rudimentary path loss and SNR just for output. However, detailed link budget (including
atmospheric loss, rain fade, etc.) is beyond this scope. We will mostly mark link “available”
if geometry allows, and leave quality metrics for later. The architecture plan for later
scopes indicates eventually computing link quality
, so we keep fields ready (like a
function to estimate received power from EIRP and distance).

31

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

◦ 

◦ 
◦ 

32

7


--- Page Break ---

Current status: We maintain a state (e.g. status  field) for the link, with values like 

AVAILABLE/UNAVAILABLE (or a boolean up/down). This state is updated each time step by
the connectivity service. Because we aren’t simulating the active switching of beams yet,
“available” essentially means potentially usable (line-of-sight exists)
. We do not yet
differentiate if the link is actively in use (that will come with scheduling in Scope 4). In
future scopes, we might refine state to “idle/active” vs. “up/down”, but for now available
= up (the link can carry traffic).
Impairments: Similar to interfaces, a link can also be explicitly impaired (down for
maintenance, etc.). The Spacetime model allows scheduling downtimes. We will mirror
that by allowing a link to have an is_forced_down  flag or a time schedule of

downtimes. In Scope 2, we won’t implement time-scheduled impairments, but we will
allow a simple manual toggle for testing. The effect is if a link is marked down due to
impairment, we will override geometry and keep it down until the impairment is cleared
.
Latency: For wireless, propagation latency can be derived from distance (speed of light).
We can calculate it if needed (roughly 3.33 µs per km). In LEO-to-ground (~2000 km) that’s
~6–7 ms one-way. We will include this calculation in the connectivity service for
completeness and possibly store it in the link’s state (so that later when simulating traffic,
we have an idea of propagation delay). If not used now, it can simply be logged.
Directional properties: If the link is directional (say interface A transmitting, B receiving),
we might attach the transmitting radio configuration to it (power, mode) as in the proto’s 

RadioConfig . In our simulation’s data model, since we aren’t yet doing separate TX/RX

simulation, we don’t need to store separate configs per direction beyond what’s in the
TransceiverModels of each end. However, to align with the API, we note that each link
direction could have distinct parameters (especially if one end is a transmitter with
certain power and the other end’s transmitter has different power for the opposite
direction). We will ensure our model could support that – for example, by looking up each
interface’s transmit power when computing the link from that side. For now, a
bidirectional link with symmetric hardware we assume roughly equal feasibility both ways
(if not, one direction might have shorter range due to weaker power; but since we won’t
fail one side and not the other in Scope 2, this detail can be glossed over until link
budgets are considered).

Link Creation & Storage: We anticipate two ways links get into the system:

Scenario-defined Links: The scenario description explicitly lists certain links (e.g. “satellite_A.if0 -
> groundStation_X.if0” downlink, etc.). In this case, we create link objects for each definition. This
is the primary method in Scope 2. We assume the user or scenario designer knows which
potential links to include (based on network design). If a link is not defined, the simulator will not
consider that pair of nodes as connected even if geometry is favorable. (This is important: we
don’t auto-connect every satellite to every ground station – that would be unrealistic. E.g., maybe
only certain satellites have missions to talk to certain stations.)
Auto-generated Links: We will not auto-generate all possible links in Scope 2, but we design the
Connectivity Service such that it could handle dynamic link creation in the future. For example, a
future optimization might be to generate a “potential link” for every pair of compatible wireless
interfaces and then filter by geometry (similar to computing a complete visibility graph). But that
could be many links and not all are needed. Instead, we stick to scenario-provided links (which
likely represent the network topology the user is interested in). In future (Scope 5), an automated
planner might add links (like create a new inter-satellite link on the fly), which our data model
will allow via an API call to add a link. Our design will permit link addition at runtime (the KB can
insert a new link safely and the connectivity check next tick will handle it).

◦ 

33

◦ 

25

◦ 

◦ 

• 

• 

• 

8


--- Page Break ---

We store all NetworkLink objects in the Knowledge Base’s state. This could be in a global list of links, or
indexed by node or interface for quick lookup (e.g. KB may have a map: interface_id -> list of outgoing
link IDs, to quickly find what links need update when that interface moves). We likely will maintain both
a global registry of links (for unique ID management and retrieval by ID) and adjacency lists (for
performance in checking links – see Connectivity logic below). Each link knows its endpoints, but we
may also want each interface to know which links it is part of. We will implement that relationship to
optimize checks: e.g., store in each NetworkInterface a list of link IDs that originate or terminate at it.

Data Flow for Link Status: The link’s status (available/unavailable) is  derived data based on the
positions of platforms (for wireless) or static assumptions (wired). We will not hard-code any static state
for wireless links – they will be recomputed. However, we do initialize all links as “down” or “unknown” at
time  0  and  then  run  the  first  connectivity  check  to  set  those  that  are  immediately  available.
(Alternatively, we run connectivity logic at t=0 right after scenario load to initialize states). We ensure
that any API or query for a link’s status will always reflect the last computed value for the current sim
time.

Ground Station Horizon Limit: A particular parameter to mention is the minimum elevation angle for
ground stations (and potentially other ground-based antennas). We incorporate this as follows: Each
WirelessInterface that  is  ground-based  can  have  a
 min_elevation_deg  field  (in  the

TransceiverModel or interface settings). This represents the lowest elevation above the horizon the
antenna can or will use (often to avoid obstacles and atmospheric loss). If not specified, we default to 0°
(meaning the antenna will attempt to track down to the horizon). Many real ground stations might use
5° or 10° as a limit. Our connectivity calculation will check the elevation angle of a satellite as seen from
the ground and require it to be greater than min_elevation to declare the link available. We will include
a default of, say, 5° for our GroundStation_KuBand model to be realistic, but scenarios can adjust this.
This is a simple way to incorporate realistic coverage constraints.

Extensibility: The NetworkLink model is kept minimal in logic in Scope 2. We treat it largely as a data
container for endpoints and status. Higher-level usage (like scheduling which link to activate) will come
later. However, we include enough detail (frequency, capacity, etc.) so that when we implement those
features we don’t need to alter the data structures much. For instance, in Scope 4/5 when we schedule
flows, we might mark certain links as actively in use vs. just available; our Link object could then get an
attribute like in_use_by_flow_id . We won’t add that now, but the object is there to be extended.

Also, we keep link objects around even when not available, rather than creating/destroying them on the
fly, so that we can accumulate statistics (e.g. how long was it available over a period) or easily generate
contact time reports later. This design aligns with the idea of computing contact windows in the future
by analyzing a link’s availability over time
.

Connectivity Evaluation Module

With the data model in place (interfaces on nodes, and defined links between interfaces), we develop
the  Connectivity Service to evaluate which links are up at a given time. This is the core functional
addition of Scope 2. The service will implement geometry-based line-of-sight (LoS) checks and update
link states accordingly, on each simulation tick or upon position changes. Key responsibilities and
design decisions for this module:

15

9


--- Page Break ---

Geometry Calculations for Wireless Links

For each wireless link (or each link involving wireless interfaces), we perform the following checks to
determine if a valid line-of-sight path exists:

Satellite-to-Ground links: We compute whether the satellite is above the ground station’s
horizon by checking the elevation angle. Using the satellite’s current position (in Earth-centered
coordinates) and the ground station’s position (latitude, longitude, altitude on Earth), we
calculate elevation as seen from the ground. If the elevation is greater than the ground
interface’s min_elevation  requirement (e.g. > 5°), then the satellite is in view of the ground

station. If below that angle (or below 0°, i.e. below horizon), the Earth blocks the line-of-sight.
Geometrically, this can be determined by vector dot-products: we have Earth’s radius (approx
6371 km) and the positions:
Let G = position vector of the ground station in ECEF (Earth-Centered, Earth-Fixed coordinates),
and S = position vector of the satellite in ECEF at the current time. We can determine the
elevation angle by comparing S - G to the local vertical at G. One formula: the elevation angle e

satisfies
$\cos(90° - e) = \frac{(S - G) \cdot \hat{G}}{|S - G|}$,
where $\hat{G}$ is the unit vector from Earth center to the ground station. We compute $e$ and
check if $e > \text{minElev}$.
Alternatively, a simpler check: Determine if the line from ground to satellite intersects Earth. The
condition for LoS is often given by: distance from Earth center to the line segment > Earth radius.
We can compute the point on the line SG closest to Earth’s center and check its distance. But
using elevation angle is straightforward given we know ground coordinates.
We will implement a utility function compute_elevation(ground_position, 

sat_position)  that returns the elevation angle (in degrees). Then if elevation >= 

min_elev_deg: link_available = True else False .

We will include Earth as a sphere of radius R (6371 km). Ground station altitude (if any) is added
to R for position G. This yields slight differences if altitude is significant (e.g. a mountain top
station), which we account for by using the actual G vector magnitude.

Example: If a LEO satellite is overhead of the ground station, elevation ~90°. If it’s near the
horizon,  elevation  approaches  0°.  Our  min_elev  prevents  using  near-horizon  passes  if
configured.

Satellite-to-Satellite  (Intersatellite)  links:  We  check  if  the  direct  line  between  the  two
spacecraft is unobstructed by Earth. For any two satellites A and B, both in orbit around Earth,
the line-of-sight exists if and only if the  angle between their position vectors (from Earth
center) is less than a certain threshold. Specifically, if Earth’s sphere doesn’t intersect the line
segment connecting A and B. A practical test:

Let A and B be ECEF position vectors of the two satellites. We find the shortest distance from
Earth center to the line AB. This can be computed by vector projection. The formula: find
parameter $t$ where the point on AB closest to the origin is $P = A + t (B - A)$. Solve $t = -\frac{A
\cdot (B-A)}{|B-A|^2}$. If $0 \le t \le 1$, the closest point lies between A and B; compute distance
$d = |P|$. If $d > R$, then no Earth obstruction (line passes sufficiently above Earth). If $d \le R$,
then Earth intersects the line, blocking it. If $t < 0$ or >1, then one satellite is “behind” the other
as seen from Earth, and one of them would be below the other’s horizon.
A simpler approach uses angles: Compute angle $\theta = \angle AOB$ where O is Earth center.
Using dot product: $\cos\theta = \frac{A \cdot B}{|A||B|}$. If $\theta < \theta_{\text{max}}$ for
LoS. What is $\theta_{\text{max}}$? It’s basically when the line just grazes Earth. If both satellites

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

10


--- Page Break ---

are at altitudes such that their horizon half-angle is e.g. X°, then likely $\theta_{\text{max}}
\approx$ (180° - 2X°). But since we can do the distance method, we’ll prefer that for exactness.
We implement line_of_sight_space(A_pos, B_pos)  that returns true if Earth does not

block. We use Earth radius R in that calc.
We will test edge cases: if satellites are on opposite sides of Earth, $d=0 < R$, blocked. If they are
very far (like GEO to GEO on opposite longitudes, likely blocked if they are ~120° apart or more).
For simplicity, we assume no other obstacles (no large structures or other planets, etc.).

If the link is between a satellite and another high-altitude platform (e.g. a balloon), we treat it the
same – any two moving platforms with positions can use this check.

Ground-to-Ground wireless links: Although not a primary focus (terrestrial wireless may be
considered “wired” for our sim if it’s a fixed microwave link), if we ever model a long-distance
ground radio link (e.g. two distant ground stations via microwave), we could reuse the same
Earth intersection check (since both are essentially at Earth’s surface). However, we will likely
treat fixed terrestrial links as wired (for now) due to complexity of terrain, etc. So we won’t
explicitly implement ground-ground LoS beyond noting that if needed, the Earth curvature
formula can be applied.

Range Limit: Optionally, if a transceiver model specifies a maximum range (e.g. an optical
terminal might only work within 5,000 km), we will enforce that. After checking LoS, we compute
the distance between the two platforms. If the distance exceeds either interface’s max range
specification, we mark the link unavailable
. For RF LEO/GEO cases, typically if LoS exists,
range is not an issue since they can communicate over those distances with appropriate power.
But we include this for completeness and for models like optical or low-power radios. The
transceiver model could have a field max_range_km  for this. By default (if not set), we assume

no range limit except the horizon (omni coverage).

Antenna Field of View: As mentioned, we assume hemispherical coverage for antennas by
default (they can serve any target above the local horizon). We do not yet model narrow beam
pointing or require explicit pointing angles. This means if satellite A and satellite B have LoS, we
assume their antennas can align accordingly, even if in reality a satellite might need to rotate or
have a limited field of regard. This is a simplification we document as an assumption. In the
future, if a transceiver model had a limited field-of-view (say ±45° off nadir), we would
incorporate that by checking the angle between the antenna’s boresight (which might align with
platform orientation) and the direction to the other satellite. Scope 2 will not implement this; we
effectively treat all wireless interfaces as capable of connecting to any direction as long as
geometry permits and multi-tasking limits (see below) are not exceeded.

The above checks yield a boolean decision for each potential link: AVAILABLE (if all conditions met) or
UNAVAILABLE (if any condition fails). Specifically, for a wireless directional link from A->B, we require: -
Interface A is not impaired and interface B is not impaired. - Interface A and B share a common
frequency band (we’ll assume yes in scenario). - If B is ground, A’s platform is above B’s horizon (and vice
versa – but if A is satellite and B ground, vice versa is trivial since ground is basically at A’s nadir if A sees
it). - If both A and B are satellites, LoS unobstructed by Earth. - Range within limits (if set). - (No capacity
or scheduling check in this scope).

If a link is bidirectional, we apply the same logic; effectively both directions meet or fail the criteria
together, so we mark the link available only if mutual LoS.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

8

• 

11


--- Page Break ---

We will implement efficient geometry calculations, possibly with the aid of a library: - We already use an
SGP4 library to get satellite positions in ECEF (or we convert from TEME to ECEF). We will reuse those
position outputs. - We may use  NumPy for vector math in Python (for performance, computing dot
products, etc.). - If needed, a library like astropy  or skyfield  could compute elevation angles, but

given the straightforward math, we’ll implement it directly to avoid external dependencies. - Earth
parameters: use WGS-84 Earth radius for ECEF (mean radius 6371 km). If high accuracy needed, one
could use ellipsoidal Earth model for elevation (slightly different horizon at high latitudes), but this
complexity  is  probably  unnecessary  at  this  stage.  We  will  note  that  we  use  a  spherical  Earth
approximation for connectivity.

Connectivity Service Operation & Data Flow

The Connectivity Service (let’s call it ConnectivityService  class) will provide methods to evaluate

and update link states. Its operation in the simulation loop is as follows:

Initialization: At simulator start or scenario load, the ConnectivityService is initialized with
references to:
The KnowledgeBase (so it can access all nodes, interfaces, and links).
Possibly it pre-computes or caches some data: e.g. it might build adjacency lists mapping each
moving platform to the links that depend on it (for performance). We can optimize by noting that
only links involving at least one moving platform need continuous checking. If both endpoints
are fixed (ground-ground fiber), it’s always up and can be set once. If one endpoint moves, check
each tick. So we might categorize links into static (no moving parts), semi-static (one side fixed,
one moving), and fully dynamic (both moving). In Scope 2, given typical scenarios, the majority
will be satellite-to-ground (semi-static) or sat-to-sat (dynamic). This caching is an internal
optimization to avoid iterating over absolutely all links if not needed.

If desired, pre-fetch any constant values (like Earth radius, etc.) or references to transceiver
models for quick access.

Update on Time Tick: Each simulation tick (e.g. each second, or whatever step chosen):

The Simulation Time Controller calls 

ConnectivityService.updateConnectivity(current_time)  after updating all platform

positions for that time.

The ConnectivityService will iterate through all links (or only those needing eval). For each link:

If link is wired: We do not need geometry check. If it’s marked as operational (no
impairment), we directly set status = AVAILABLE (unless we plan to simulate manual
downtime – if an impairment flag is set on this link or its interfaces, we set UNAVAILABLE).
Since wired links state rarely changes (except if someone toggles it off), we might even
skip re-evaluating it every tick. We can set it once at init and only change if an impairment
event occurs. But for simplicity, the update loop can check a wired link’s impairment flag
each time (which is negligible overhead given fewer wired links typically).
If link is wireless: Determine the two endpoint interfaces. Retrieve their platform
positions:
If either endpoint’s node has no platform (meaning a non-physical node), then this
wireless link’s geometry cannot be computed (the node has no position). In practice, we
should not have a wireless link involving a node with no platform – that scenario is invalid
because a “floating” network node can’t have a radio in nowhere. We will log an error if

1. 

2. 
3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

12


--- Page Break ---

this is encountered and mark link unavailable. (E.g., if someone tried to link an internet
backbone node to a satellite directly with a wireless link but the internet node has no
coordinates, we can’t simulate that – they should have had a ground platform for the
internet gateway or use a wired link).
Otherwise, we get coordinates for both endpoints: For a ground node, that’s the fixed lat/
long (we convert to ECEF vector G). For a satellite or airborne node, that’s the propagated
ECEF vector S from the Orbit Propagator (Scope 1’s output).
We then execute the LoS check algorithms described above:
Compute elevation if one end is ground, etc. 
Compute Earth blockage for space-space.
Check range if applicable.
Check interface and link impairment states:
If either interface is marked down (operational_impairment), immediately mark
link UNAVAILABLE (we might short-circuit other checks).
If the link itself has an impairment flag (like scheduled downtime), mark it down.
Decide availability: if all geometry and operational criteria are satisfied, set link.status =
AVAILABLE (True). Otherwise, set it UNAVAILABLE (False).
Optionally, for each wireless link that is available, compute secondary data:
The slant range (distance) between the two platforms. (We will definitely compute this as
it’s needed for future link budgets; it’s easy to compute from vectors.)
Propagation delay (distance / c).
Possibly the current geometry angles (elevation for ground link, or azimuth if needed for
advanced analysis, though not needed now).
These values can be stored in the link object for later use or just logged.
We might also compute an approximate receive power or SNR just to have an idea (using
a simple free-space path loss formula and the stored EIRP/G/T). This is not required by
Scope 2, but including a log output like “Link sat1->gs1 available, range=1200 km, est. SNR
= 10 dB” could be useful for debugging. We will implement a function for link budget if
time permits, or simply note that it’s TBD. 
After processing, if the new status is different from the last status, we can trigger an
event:
e.g., Log an info: “[Time 123] Link sat1->gs1 became AVAILABLE”.
If a subscription mechanism exists (perhaps a future feature for telemetry), we would
notify subscribers of link state change. (We have the structure in KB to potentially allow
state subscriptions since Scope 1 considered it
).
We ensure the status update is done atomically to the KB (if multi-threaded, lock around
it, but likely single-thread simulation loop, so fine).

Complexity: If we have N links, this loop is O(N) each tick. This is acceptable for the scale
envisioned (even a large constellation might have hundreds or a few thousand possible links
defined). If we had to consider every possible sat-to-sat pair it could be huge (O(n^2) for n
satellites), but again, we assume scenario prunes unneeded links. In the future, Scope 5’s contact
plan precomputation could optimize this by calculating windows offline rather than per tick. But
for now, the live per-tick check is straightforward and manageable.

Data Update & Access: The KnowledgeBase is updated with each link’s new status. The link
objects themselves may reside in the KB, so updating their status  field is inherently updating

the  KB’s  state.  If  we  maintain  any  separate  indexing  (like  an  “adjacency  matrix”  or  graph
representation), we update that too. For example, we might have an in-memory graph structure
where nodes connect if link available. But we can generate that on the fly when needed. In

◦ 

◦ 

▪ 
▪ 
▪ 

◦ 

▪ 

▪ 

◦ 

◦ 
◦ 

◦ 
◦ 

◦ 
◦ 

◦ 

◦ 
◦ 

14

◦ 

8. 

9. 

13


--- Page Break ---

Scope 2, it suffices that if someone queries the link object from KB, they see the status  field

reflecting availability. We will implement KB query functions such as:

get_link_status(link_id)  -> returns available/unavailable.

get_node_connectivity(node_id)  -> returns list of other nodes that node_id currently has

an available link to. This could be derived by checking all links involving the interfaces of that
node. We can implement this to aid debugging (e.g. for a given time, get connectivity adjacency).

These queries operate on the updated data after each tick.

Post-Update Actions: Once link statuses are updated, the simulation loop might proceed to
other tasks. In Scope 2, there’s not much else (no routing or traffic yet). We might simply output
telemetry. We will include the possibility of generating a “connectivity snapshot” at intervals.
For example, after each tick or every N ticks, the simulator could output a summary of all active
links. This is useful for verification and later for creating contact plans. We will implement a
simple logger or printout when running a scenario in verbose mode to list current active links.

Handling Multiple Simultaneous Links and Constraints

An important aspect to clarify: in reality, a single wireless interface (antenna) cannot usually support
multiple simultaneous independent links unless it has multi-beam capability. In Scope 2, we  do not
enforce this constraint – we treat each potential link independently. For instance, if a ground station
has one antenna and two satellites are above the horizon, our simulation will mark both satellite links
as “available”. This means potentially both could be used, even though physically that might require two
antennas. The reason we allow this is that scheduling which link to actually use at a time is a Scope 4
concern (the  scheduler will later ensure only one is active if only one beam is available). We will,
however,  prepare  for  this  by  noting:  -  We  can  include  a  property  like  max_beams  in  the

TransceiverModel  (e.g.  a  phased  array  could  have  max_beams  =  2  meaning  it  can  form  two

simultaneous links). For a typical dish, max_beams = 1 . In Scope 2, we will store this property (default

1) but not act on it. The connectivity service will not enforce it (it won’t arbitrarily mark one link down
because another is up – that’s a scheduling decision). - We will add documentation in code comments
that if multiple links share an interface and are simultaneously geometrically available, they will all be
flagged available. It is up to higher layers to decide which ones to actually activate. We will test a
scenario where one ground station interface has two satellites in view, to ensure both links show as
available, and note that this is an intentional simplification. - In later scopes, when scheduling is
introduced, we will refine link state to possibly indicate “available but not active due to concurrency
limits” vs. “actively used”. For now, only geometry and manual downs control availability.

Example Algorithm Summary (Pseudo-code)

To illustrate, here is a pseudo-code of the connectivity update logic for one tick: 

for link in all_links:

if link.type == "wired":

if link.impaired or link.interfaceA.impaired or

link.interfaceB.impaired:
link.status = UNAVAILABLE

else:
link.status = AVAILABLE
# always on

continue

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14


--- Page Break ---

# wireless link
A = link.interfaceA
B = link.interfaceB
if A.impaired or B.impaired or link.impaired:
link.status = UNAVAILABLE
continue

posA = A.node.platform.position_ecef
# get ECEF coordinates

posB = B.node.platform.position_ecef
available = True
# Ground horizon check
if A.node.platform.is_ground and B.node.platform.is_space:
elev = compute_elevation(A.node.platform, posB)
if elev < A.min_elevation_deg: available = False

if B.node.platform.is_ground and A.node.platform.is_space:
elev = compute_elevation(B.node.platform, posA)
if elev < B.min_elevation_deg: available = False

# Earth occlusion check for space-space
if A.node.platform.is_space and B.node.platform.is_space:

if not line_of_sight_space(posA, posB): available = False

# Frequency compatibility (just in case)
if A.medium == "wireless" and B.medium == "wireless":

if A.transceiver.freq_band != B.transceiver.freq_band:

# (Better: check overlap)
available = False

# Range check
distance = norm(posB - posA)
if A.transceiver.max_range and distance > A.transceiver.max_range:
available = False

if B.transceiver.max_range and distance > B.transceiver.max_range:
available = False

# Set link status based on available flag
link.status = AVAILABLE if available else UNAVAILABLE

# If available, compute latency and maybe log quality
if link.status == AVAILABLE:
link.propagation_delay = distance / C
# speed of light

log(f"{link.id} up: range={distance:.0f}km, 
delay={link.propagation_delay*1000:.2f}ms")

else:
log(f"{link.id} down (geometry/impairment)")

(This pseudo-code assumes certain helpers and attributes. In actual implementation, we have to handle
platform references carefully, and use actual Earth radius in compute_elevation, etc.)

15


--- Page Break ---

The Connectivity Service will be unit-tested thoroughly (see Testing section) to ensure each logic branch
works (horizon, occlusion, etc.). 

Finally, note that wired links do not require such calculations, which simplifies things. They effectively
behave as static edges in the connectivity graph (unless toggled off).  Wireless links become time-
varying edges.

Knowledge Base & API Considerations

After each update, the KnowledgeBase holds the new connectivity state. If the simulator provides an
API (likely in Scope 3 via the Northbound Interface), it could allow queries like “get current network
graph” or subscribe to link status events. We are laying the foundation for that: - We ensure that the
data structures (NetworkNode with interfaces, links connecting interfaces) mirror the Spacetime API
data model. E.g., a client using NBI might create a NetworkLink resource with given endpoints; our
simulator would instantiate a corresponding NetworkLink object. Likewise, when our simulator updates
link status, it might emit a Simulation Telemetry event (via SBI maybe) about link state changes. For
now, we can simulate this by simple logging, but we keep the door open for real API hooks. - The
internal representation will make it easy to produce a contact plan if needed – essentially a list of time
intervals when each link is up. In Scope 2, we do not precompute those intervals, but we could output a
log as the sim runs. By Scope 5, we plan to actually precompute and store these windows for planning
algorithms
. Our design of keeping links persistent and updating a boolean each tick is compatible
with that future improvement (we could run a separate routine to calculate future availability times
using orbital predictions). - The topology graph is essentially formed by the nodes and links in the KB
.  We  treat  the  collection  of  all  nodes,  interfaces,  and  links  as  the  current  scenario’s  network
topology. In Scope 2, this graph is dynamic but only due to movement; the set of nodes and links is
static (no additions/deletions in runtime). We will implement functions to export this graph state, e.g.
for debugging or visualization. For instance, output a JSON or Graphviz dot file of all nodes and which
nodes have active links at a given time. This can help validate that the simulator correctly identifies
connectivity (we might compare with an external STK scenario or known contact times).

In  summary,  the  Connectivity  Evaluation  module  continuously  updates  the  network  connectivity
graph in the simulation. After Scope 2 implementation, the simulator will be capable of answering
queries like: “At time T, which network nodes have direct communication links, and which are isolated?” This
is a fundamental step toward later simulating routing and traffic.

Implementation Modules & Interfaces

We break down the Scope 2 implementation into distinct components/modules, each with clearly
defined interfaces (methods, data flow) for integration. Below is the module breakdown and the plan
for each:

Data Model Modules: 
NetworkInterface Module: Defines the NetworkInterface class and related enums (MediumType:
Wired/Wireless). Provides methods to create interfaces, validate attributes, and possibly update
interface state (e.g. setting impairment). Integrates with NetworkNode (each NetworkNode will
have a list of NetworkInterfaces). Will include serialization/deserialization functions if needed
(e.g. from a scenario config file or to output state via API). 
TransceiverModel Library: Could be a simple static class or even just a JSON file + loader that
populates a dictionary of TransceiverModel objects. Provides lookup by model_id. This module

34

35

• 
• 

• 

16


--- Page Break ---

may also contain utility methods, like computing antenna gain at a given angle (though initially
not used, but stubbed for future). It will reside perhaps in a “config” or “models” package. 
NetworkLink Module: Defines the NetworkLink and BidirectionalLink classes. Provides factory
methods to create directional or bidirectional links given interface references. Contains logic for
linking two interfaces (with optional radio config per direction). Also includes any functions to
serialize a link (e.g. to JSON or proto) and to apply impairment state. Since link status is dynamic,
the link object mainly holds static info plus a mutable status field. We will ensure thread-safe
update of that status (likely by design, all updates happen in the single simulation thread, so it’s
safe; if not, we’ll add locking around status). 

All  these  data  model  definitions  will  be  placed  in  appropriate  namespaces  (e.g.

simulator.core.entities  for interfaces and links, complementing PlatformDefinition and

NetworkNode classes from Scope 1). Documentation strings will reference the corresponding
sections of the requirements (to maintain traceability, e.g. “NetworkInterface corresponds to
Spacetime NetworkInterface NBI resource
”).

Knowledge Base Integration:
The KnowledgeBase (perhaps implemented as a singleton, or passed around as needed) will
gain:

Storage structures: e.g. self.network_interfaces  (if we want a global registry, but since

interfaces are contained in nodes, we might not need a separate global list), and 

self.network_links  (dictionary of link_id -> NetworkLink). The KB’s existing structures for

nodes will be leveraged: each NetworkNode object can contain its interfaces, so accessing
interfaces is typically via the node ( node.interfaces ).

Methods to add and retrieve interfaces/links: e.g. KB.add_interface(node_id, 

interface_obj) , KB.add_link(link_obj) , KB.get_link(link_id) , 

KB.list_links()  etc. These allow other components (like scenario loader or connectivity

service) to manipulate the KB. 
Possibly, an index for quick lookup of links by interface: e.g. 

KB.links_by_interface[iface_global_id] -> [link_ids...] . We will update this

index on link creation. The Connectivity Service can use it if we optimize per-interface updates
(though our initial approach is simply looping through all links, which is fine).

Concurrency: If the simulation runs in one thread and API calls in another, KB must lock when
reading/updating these structures. We will use the same concurrency mechanism from Scope 1
(perhaps a ReadWrite lock or simple mutex around the KB state)
. In Scope 2, since external
API use is minimal, we might not fully exercise concurrent writes, but we design for it. For
example, if an API call attempted to toggle an interface impairment while the simulation tick is
running, we need to handle that safely (e.g. lock or queue the change). We might decide to allow
impairments  only  at  tick  boundaries  to  simplify.  We  will  mention  in  documentation  that
simultaneous modifications are controlled.

ConnectivityService Module:
This is the core computational module described earlier. It will likely include:

initialize() – perhaps taking the KB or lists of links and interfaces. It might precompute static
lists as discussed.

• 

• 

36

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

13

• 

• 

17


--- Page Break ---

update_all_links(current_time) – performs the iterative check for each link and updates
statuses. It uses helper functions for geometry:

compute_elevation(ground_platform, target_position)  – returns elevation

angle. (We know ground_platform’s lat/long; we can compute its ECEF vector and then do
the math with target_position).

line_of_sight_space(posA, posB)  – Earth occlusion check.

Possibly distance(posA, posB)  – though trivial.

We might encapsulate these in a submodule like GeometryUtils for cleanliness, as they
might also be used in other contexts (e.g. a future module computing contact windows or
link budgets can reuse).
The update function will clearly separate the wired vs wireless handling as outlined. It will set the
status on the link objects directly. To avoid repeating checks, it may also incorporate interface-
specific data:
We might enhance efficiency by computing some per-interface metrics each tick: e.g.
which ground stations see which satellites. However, since we already iterate links, that
might not be needed now.
If performance allows, we might double-check consistency: e.g., if link A->B is set available, then
if the reverse link object exists (B->A), it should also be set available. We ensure our logic either
handles both together (for bidirectional) or we explicitly mirror the result. This avoids any case
where one direction says up and the other says down (which physically shouldn’t happen under
our assumptions).

Logging: The service will use the simulator’s logging framework to output debug info about link
decisions. We will likely allow a verbosity level where every link change is logged.

Scenario Loader / Example Setup:
While  not  a  separate  runtime  module,  writing  the  Scope  2  plan  includes  specifying  how
scenarios are defined now that interfaces and links exist:

We will update the scenario file format or builder to allow defining interfaces under each node
and to list links. For example, if using JSON, a node entry might look like: 

{
"node_id": "node_gw_1",
"platform_id": "gs1",
"...": "...",
"interfaces": [
{ "id": "if0", "name": "GW-Ku", "type": "WIRELESS",
"transceiver_model": "GroundStation_KuBand", "ipv4": "10.0.0.1/24" },
{ "id": "if1", "name": "GW-Fiber", "type": "WIRED",
"max_data_rate": 1e9 }
]
}

And a link entry might be: 

{ "link_id": "link1", "type": "BIDIRECTIONAL", "interface_a":
"node_leo_1:if0", "interface_b": "node_gw_1:if0" }

• 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

• 

◦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

18


--- Page Break ---

We will design accordingly. If scenario input was previously perhaps Python code or a small
config, we’ll extend it similarly.
The scenario loader will create NetworkInterface objects for each interface specified and attach
to the corresponding NetworkNode in KB. Then it will create NetworkLink objects for each link
specified. We will validate references (e.g. does node_leo_1:if0  exist) and throw errors if not.

The loader will also likely assign default transceiver models if not explicitly given (for ease, e.g. if
a node is type “SATELLITE_NODE” and no interface specified, we might auto-add a default RF
interface to it in Scope 1 sample scenarios, but now we require interfaces to be explicitly listed
for clarity).

Since Scope 1’s sample scenario included nodes possibly with stub interfaces
, we might
retrofit that: if those stubs exist, we can now flesh them out with real models. Otherwise, we’ll
define them in the scenario data.

Northbound API Alignment:
Although full NBI support (gRPC endpoints, etc.) is likely in Scope 3, we ensure our Scope 2
implementation doesn’t conflict with the API. For example:

The NBI defines operations to add links, remove links. If we were implementing them now, our
modules support those actions (e.g. KB.add_link  can be called anytime).

The NBI data structures (proto messages) map to our classes (we have 1:1 correspondence in
naming fields like interface IDs, etc.). This way, when we implement the actual API calls, it’s
mostly translating incoming messages to constructing these objects and vice versa for queries.
If time permits, we might implement a rudimentary API call in Scope 2 just for demonstration,
such as a CLI or function to query connectivity (which mimics a GetNetworkTopology  NBI

call).

The Southbound Interface (SBI), which is for scheduling, will come later, so nothing to implement
now, but we mention that link availability will eventually feed into SBI telemetry (the simulation
will report available links to a scheduler or agent).

Utility Modules: 

GeometryUtils: As mentioned, a small collection of earth geometry functions (we can put the
Earth radius constant and perhaps WGS84 ellipsoid parameters here if needed in future).
Logging & Metrics: We might extend the logging utility from Scope 1 to include categories for
connectivity. We might also have a metric counter for “current number of available links” for
monitoring. E.g., each tick compute count of links up and log that. This is not critical, but can be
useful to ensure simulation is doing something (especially in large scenarios).
Time management: Scope 1 had time progression (maybe a simulation clock class). We will use
that to get current time for any time-based decisions. If we later allow time-based impairments
(e.g. link down from t1 to t2), we would integrate there.

All interfaces between modules will be carefully documented. For instance, the ConnectivityService will
be invoked by the Simulation Controller, and it will use the KnowledgeBase interface methods to get
positions and update links. The KnowledgeBase in turn uses the data model classes. This decoupling
ensures that each part can be unit tested in isolation (we can test ConnectivityService with a mocked KB
containing sample data, etc.).

• 

• 
37

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

19


--- Page Break ---

Testing Strategy (Test-Driven Development)

We will adopt a Test-Driven Development (TDD) approach for Scope 2: writing tests for each piece of
functionality before implementation, ensuring we capture all requirements and edge cases. The tests
will be organized by module and also include high-level integration scenario tests. Below is an outline of
exhaustive tests to cover the new Scope 2 features:

Unit Tests

1. NetworkInterface & TransceiverModel Tests
-  Creation and Attribute Assignment: Create sample NetworkInterface objects (wired and wireless) and
verify their fields. For wired, set max_data_rate and platform association and ensure getters return
correct values. For wireless, assign a TransceiverModel (use a dummy model object) and verify the link is
established.  Ensure  that  the  composite  global  ID  is  correctly  formatted  (e.g.

node_id:interface_id ). This might be a method like  interface.get_global_id()  that we

test.
-  Unique ID Enforcement: Attempt to add two interfaces with the same ID to one node – the second
addition should raise an exception or error. Test that the KnowledgeBase or Node class rejects duplicate
interface IDs (to maintain uniqueness).
- Operational Impairment Flag: Set an interface’s impairment flag and ensure it can be read. Possibly call
a helper like interface.is_operational()  that returns False if impaired. In a standalone test, we

can simulate toggling the flag (e.g. from None to “FAILED”) and verify that it changes the interface’s
internal state. We’ll later see effect in integration, but here at unit level just test the property works as
intended.
- TransceiverModel properties: Construct a TransceiverModel for a known configuration (e.g. an example
Ku-band model). Verify that all fields (frequency, beamwidth, power, etc.) are accessible and correct. If
the model has any method (say to compute free-space loss or check frequency overlap), test those with
known inputs. For example, if we implement a method  model.supports_frequency(freq) , test

that a frequency in band returns True and out of band False. Similarly, if we have a gain pattern
placeholder (maybe we define an isotropic model returns gain 0 dBi for any angle), test that.
- Default Values: Ensure that for unspecified optional fields (like polarization or max_range), the model
uses intended defaults (e.g. polarization default “RHCP” or None means no polarization restrictions,
max_range default = infinity). Write tests that if we don’t set max_range, our geometry logic treats it as
no limit (we might indirectly test this via connectivity tests, but can also test a utility function that
interprets None  as infinite). 

2. NetworkLink Tests
- Directional Link Setup: Create two dummy NetworkInterface objects (e.g. sat_if and ground_if) and then
create a directional NetworkLink linking them (sat_if as src, ground_if as dst). Verify that the link stores
the correct interface references and that its initial status is default (likely UNAVAILABLE until we evaluate
it).  We  might  manually  call  the  geometry  check  functions  with  positions  we  choose  to  simulate
availability (or easier: monkey-patch a position and call the connectivity update). At unit level, this might
be  too  integration-y;  instead,  we  test  structural  aspects:  -  The  link’s  src_iface_id  and

dst_iface_id  match the ones we passed. - If we call a method like link.get_endpoints() , it

returns the interface objects or IDs properly. - If we mark the link impaired ( link.impaired = True

or via a method), verify it stores that state. -  Bidirectional Link Grouping: Create a bidirectional link
between two interfaces. Our API might create one BidirectionalLink object that in turn yields two
NetworkLink instances. We test that: - The BidirectionalLink contains references to two directional links.
- Each of those directional links has endpoints A->B and B->A correctly. - They possibly share an ID or
have related IDs. We might decide that the BidirectionalLink’s ID is a high-level identifier and each

20


--- Page Break ---

directional link has an internal id like  link2_A  and  link2_B . Test that naming scheme if we

implement  it.  -  Ensure  the  relationship  is  symmetric:  e.g.  calling  a  function

bidilink.get_link_A_to_B()  returns one of the internal links and vice versa for B->A. - Frequency

Compatibility Check: If we implement a method on the link or a static function to validate that two
interfaces can link (checking frequency band overlap), unit test it. For example, create two transceiver
models: - Model X: frequency band [10–12 GHz]. - Model Y: frequency band [13–14 GHz]. Assign X to one
interface and Y to another. Attempt to create a link. The validation should flag incompatibility. We might
design NetworkLink.create(ifaceA, ifaceB)  to raise an error if bands don’t overlap. Test that

this error is indeed raised. Then test a compatible case (both in 10–12 GHz) succeeds. - Max Range in
Model vs. Link: If we allow a transceiver model to specify max_range_km , test that the model value is

correctly recognized. Perhaps use a small max_range for a test model (e.g. 1000 km), then position two
interfaces at >1000 km apart and see that connectivity logic marks the link down (the integration test
will cover it, but we can test the function that checks range: feed it distance and model range and
ensure it returns false if beyond). -  Latency and Capacity Assignment: For a wired link, set a specific
latency (say 10 ms) in scenario. Our link object might have a field for latency. Test that after creation,

link.latency  =  0.01  s  (converted  properly).  Similarly,  set  wired  interfaces  with  different

max_data_rate (e.g. 1 Gbps and 500 Mbps) and ensure the link’s effective capacity is min(1 Gbps, 500
Mbps) = 500 Mbps if we decide to compute that. If we don’t auto-compute, at least test that the values
are accessible. Possibly implement a method link.get_capacity()  that does the min logic on the

fly and test it.
-  Link Impairment: Set a link’s impairment flag and ensure that the connectivity service (when tested
later) respects it. This might be tested at integration level primarily, but we can also directly set

link.impaired=True  and  verify  that  link.status  is  set  to  UNAVAILABLE  after  an  update

(requires connectivity run or manual logic invocation, so probably integration).

3. Connectivity Geometry Utility Tests
- We will develop precise tests for the geometric algorithms: - Elevation Angle Calculation: We can craft a
scenario: * Ground station at latitude 0°, longitude 0°, altitude 0 (so ECEF position ~ (R,0,0) on equator).
* Satellite position directly above ground station at some altitude h. If the satellite is directly overhead,
elevation should be 90°. For example, satellite at (R+h, 0, 0) in ECEF (which is actually colinear with
ground station vector). Our function might yield 90° or very close (floating math might give 90 or we
define it). * Satellite at horizon: If the satellite is just at horizon, elevation = 0. We can approximate a
position just out of reach: e.g. if the satellite is on the equatorial plane 90° away in longitude: ground at
(R,0,0), satellite at (0,R+h,0). That’s 90° away, should be at horizon (neglecting altitude, if h small relative,
maybe slight above horizon if h > 0). We can test that our calculation returns something near 0° (maybe
slightly positive if h is not extremely large – could solve exactly for h that yields 0°, but easier to test a
known scenario). * Satellite below horizon: e.g. satellite on opposite side of Earth: ground at (R,0,0),
satellite at (-R,0,0) (with or without altitude). That should give negative elevation (or our function might
just give e.g. -5° if just below). * We will test: - Elevation of overhead sat ~ 90°. - Elevation of horizon sat
~ ~0° (within a tolerance). - If we apply a min_elev, e.g. min_elev=10°, we check that our logic would
mark horizon case as not available but overhead as available. * We can also test non-equatorial (to
ensure formula handles general cases): ground at lat 30°, a satellite at appropriate position. But that
might be overkill if our formula is robust. Possibly one test is fine for function. - Earth Occlusion (sat-sat):
Construct simple cases using a spherical Earth radius R: * Case 1: Two satellites both at altitude 0 (on
the surface) on opposite sides of Earth: obviously no LoS. Our line_of_sight_space(A,B)  should

return False. We simulate with positions A=(R,0,0), B=(-R,0,0). The closest approach of line AB to center is
0, definitely <R, so blocked. * Case 2: Two satellites very far out (e.g. GEO altitude ~ 35786 km) but also
opposite sides. Even at GEO, opposite sides probably still no LoS because Earth is in between (distance ~
242164 km, Earth radius ~6371, line passes through Earth). We can test something like A=(R+35786,0,0), B=(-
(R+35786),0,0) -> should be blocked. * Case 3: Two satellites relatively close in the sky: - e.g. same orbit plane
separated by small angle. For simplicity, A=(R+500, 0, 0) (satellite just above point on equator), B rotated

21


--- Page Break ---

maybe 30° around Earth: B = ((R+500)cos30, (R+500)sin30, 0). 30° separation might still have LoS? Actually if
30°, line likely goes ~some thousands km above Earth, likely clear. We can test and expect True. - We could
also test a borderline case: find the maximum separation angle for given altitude that still has LoS. But that’s
complex to derive manually. Instead, pick an intuitive scenario: * For ISS-like alt (~400 km altitude), it’s
roughly known that two ISS satellites can see each other if within ~∼30°-40° (just guess). Our test can pick 30°
and see result – expecting maybe still blocked or maybe free? Actually need guess: If each at 400 km, 30°
apart likely still Earth between partly… We might just pick a clearly small angle like 10° and expect LoS = True.
- Or an easier scenario: same position (A = B) trivial LoS (True) – just to ensure code doesn’t do something
weird with divide by zero or so. * We will verify the algorithm outputs expected booleans for these cases. -
Distance and Delay*: Test the distance function (should be straightforward vector diff norm). For
example, positions (0,0,0) to (1000,0,0) yields 1000. Or better, use known distance: from Earth center to
horizon of ground station ~? But simpler, just test a known vector distance. Then test propagation delay
= distance / c: e.g. 300,000 km => ~1 s. We can test small values easily to ensure the formula is correct.

4. ConnectivityService Logic Tests (Functional Tests)
These tests treat the connectivity update function as the unit, using mocked or simple data: - Single Link
availability: Construct a simple scenario in code: - Create one satellite node with a wireless interface, one
ground node with a wireless interface. Use known positions for the satellite (maybe manually set it in
ECEF for test). - Create a link between them (sat -> ground directional). - Use the ConnectivityService’s
function to update that link. - Set the satellite’s position such that it is directly above the ground (e.g. as
per earlier, ground at (R,0,0), sat at (R+500,0,0)). Then call update. Check that link.status becomes
AVAILABLE (True) because sat is in view. Check that the computed delay is reasonable (~(R+500 - R)/c =
500 km/c ~ 1.67 ms, it might store 0.0017 s). - Now set satellite position to a blocked position (e.g. sat on
other side of Earth: (-R-500,0,0)). Update again (simulate time progression or just manually set pos and
call update). Check that link.status = UNAVAILABLE. - This test effectively verifies horizon logic via the
service. - Additionally, if ground interface has min_elev >0, we can adjust scenario: e.g. set satellite at a
low elevation angle ~ 2° and min_elev = 5°, ensure link becomes UNAVAILABLE due to min elev cut (we
might simulate that by picking a position just above horizon). - Inter-satellite link toggle: Two satellites
with a link: - Create two satellite nodes A and B, each with a wireless interface. Set their positions for
two times: * Time1: positions such that they have LoS (e.g. near each other). Perhaps put both at
(R+700, 0, 0) and (R+700, 1000, 0) for a short separation of 1000 km along Earth’s surface – likely LoS
(since they are nearly in same direction from Earth, 1000 km apart horizontally at roughly same
altitude). * Time2: positions such that Earth blocks them. For example, put one on opposite side relative
to the other: A at (R+700, 0, 0), B at (-R-700, 0, 0). Then check not available. - Actually, to simulate time,
we can just manually reposition and call update each time. - Check link.status true in first case, false in
second. - If the link is bidirectional (A<->B), ensure that both directions reflect the same status. We
might define it as one bidirectional link in scenario. The service logic will likely handle it once if coded
well. But to be sure, we could instead define two directional links (A->B and B->A) to simulate a
bidirectional.  Then  see  that  after  update,  both  get  same  result.  (Our  service  might  handle  each
directional independently but geometry gives symmetrical result anyway). - We also test that if one
satellite’s interface is marked impaired = down, then even if geometry was favorable, link becomes
UNAVAILABLE. Simulate by setting B.interface.impaired = True before update call; then expect link down
(and ideally, perhaps skip geometry check). - Multiple Links and Node with multiple interfaces: - Build a
scenario with: one satellite (Sat1) with a wireless interface, a ground station (GS1) with two interfaces
(one wireless, one wired), and an internet node (INET) with a wired interface. - Create links: Sat1.if0 <->
GS1.if0 (wireless bidirectional link), and GS1.if1 <-> INET.if0 (wired link). - Place Sat1 in a position above
GS1 for part of orbit and below horizon for another: * GS1 at some lat/long, say equator. * Sat1 at time
T0: above GS (so link should be available). At time T1: below horizon (unavailable). - Execute connectivity
update at T0 and T1: * At T0: Expect Sat-GS link AVAILABLE, GS-INET link AVAILABLE (wired always on).
So overall, Sat can reach INET (2-hop) at T0. The test should verify link statuses individually: - Sat1-GS1
link.status == AVAILABLE. - GS1-INET link.status == AVAILABLE. * At T1: Sat moved, Sat1-GS1 link.status

22


--- Page Break ---

== UNAVAILABLE. GS1-INET remains AVAILABLE (wired unaffected by sat). - This scenario also tests that
the ground station GS1’s two interfaces operate independently: one losing connectivity doesn’t affect
the other (besides that the overall path sat->inet is broken, but as links themselves, fiber stays up). We
verify that in the data: GS1-INET link stays true. - Also test that the GS1’s  multiple interfaces are
correctly handled: the wireless link uses GS1.if0 and the wired uses GS1.if1. The connectivity service
should not mix these up. For instance, ensure that when Sat1-GS1 wireless goes down, it doesn’t
accidentally mark GS1’s wired down (it shouldn’t, as they are separate link objects). - If we want to test
multiple simultaneous wireless connections: Add another satellite Sat2 with link to GS1.if0 as well. Now
GS1.if0 has two links (to Sat1 and Sat2). Place Sat1 and Sat2 both above horizon at same time (maybe on
different sides of sky but both visible). Both links should become AVAILABLE. This tests that GS1.if0 can
have two available links concurrently. We expect our system to mark both as available. We’ll verify: - link
Sat1-GS1 = AVAILABLE, link Sat2-GS1 = AVAILABLE at T0. - If we had max_beams=1  configured, we are

not enforcing it, so still both are available. We can assert that we did not mistakenly drop one. (We
might log a warning in future, but in Scope 2 no action). - This verifies that concurrency control is
deferred. - Then perhaps move Sat2 below horizon leaving Sat1 up at T1: check one link goes down, the
other remains up. This ensures independent evaluation. - Impairment effects: - Take one of the above
scenarios and do: mark GS1.if0 as down (simulate hardware failure) at some time. Then run update.
Even if Sat1 is overhead, link Sat1-GS1 should now be UNAVAILABLE due to GS1.if0 impairment. Check
that in output. - Similarly, mark the GS1-INET wired link as down (maybe we have a method like

link.set_impaired(True) ). After update, that link shows UNAVAILABLE (even though wired and

normally always up). This confirms the impairment mechanism overrides normal state. - These can be
separate unit tests focusing on impairments toggling link states.

Edge case: Node with no Platform and wireless interface:
We can create a dummy scenario where a network node with no platform (e.g. an “Internet
node” not attached to any platform) erroneously has a wireless interface defined. While this
should be avoided, we want to ensure the system handles it gracefully. The connectivity check
might find a link connecting that interface to a satellite’s interface. Since the node has no
position, we expect our code to mark the link unavailable and log an error.
Test: Create Node INET (no platform), add a wireless interface to it (perhaps model doesn’t
matter). Link it to Sat1.if0. In update, since INET has no coordinates, we cannot compute LoS
properly. Our plan was to treat this as no connectivity. We check that link.status becomes
UNAVAILABLE. We also ensure no crash happens (our code should check for platform presence
and handle it).
This test ensures robustness to scenario misconfiguration. In practice, we’ll discourage such links
(should use a platform for any radio node), but our simulator should not fail catastrophically if it
occurs.

These unit tests ensure each piece of logic works in isolation or in tightly controlled mini-scenarios.

Integration Tests (End-to-End Scenario Tests)

We will also test full scenarios that mirror realistic use-cases, combining multiple components:

1. Mixed Constellation Scenario (LEO, GEO, Ground, Internet) – extended Scope 1 scenario with links:
We will take the sample scenario from Scope 1 (which had multiple satellites and ground nodes) and
extend it with interfaces and links to verify end-to-end behavior: - Scenario Description:
-  SatLeo1 (LEO satellite) with NetworkNode  node_leo_1. We give node_leo_1 a wireless interface “if0”
using model LEO_Satellite_KuBand.
- SatLeo2 (another LEO) with node_leo_2, also with wireless “if0” (same model or similar).
- SatGeo1 (GEO satellite) with node_geo_1, with wireless “if0” using model (could be same KuBand or a

• 
• 

• 

• 

23


--- Page Break ---

different band if we want to test mismatches; but better use same to allow linking).
- GroundStation1 (GS1) with node_gw_1, attached to a fixed platform at, say, latitude appropriate to see
SatGeo1 (e.g. equatorial). node_gw_1 gets two interfaces: “if0” wireless (GroundStation_KuBand model)
and “if1” wired (Ethernet/fiber).
- UserTerminal1 (UT1) with node_ut_1, attached to a ground platform perhaps far from GS1 (maybe not
needed if we focus on SAT-UT links). UT could have a wireless interface “if0” (maybe also KuBand to talk
to LEOs).
- InternetNode1 with node_inet_1 (no physical platform, representing a core network gateway). It gets a
wired interface “if0” (to connect to GS1). 

Links: 

SatLeo1.if0 <-> GS1.if0 (bidirectional wireless link, representing that LEO can link to that
ground station when in view). 
SatLeo2.if0 <-> GS1.if0 (maybe also allow second LEO to same ground station). 
SatGeo1.if0 <-> GS1.if0 (GEO to same ground station). 
UT1.if0 <-> SatLeo1.if0 (optional: if we want to simulate a user connecting via the LEO
satellite; or UT1.if0 <-> GS1.if0 as an alternative scenario representing maybe a terrestrial
wireless link – but more realistic is UT to LEO). We can include UT to LEO downlink to see
how a moving LEO covers a user. 
GS1.if1 <-> INET1.if0 (wired link from gateway to internet). 

Expected Behavior: 

Initially, at simulation start (t=0), we configure satellite positions:
Suppose GS1 is at lat 0, lon 0. Place SatGeo1 in GEO orbit at lon 0 (so it’s always above
GS1, roughly at zenith). SatGeo1->GS1 link should be continuously AVAILABLE
throughout the sim (with minimal variation in geometry). We expect the simulator to
keep that link up every tick. We will verify that over a long duration, it never drops. 
SatLeo1 is in LEO orbit (e.g. 500 km, inclined maybe). As time progresses (simulate e.g. 0
to 2 hours), SatLeo1 will periodically come above GS1’s horizon and then set. We expect
multiple access windows. The simulation, running stepwise, should mark the Leo1-GS1
link as available during those windows. We will verify times – e.g., by printing when it
goes up/down – and ensure it matches an external prediction (like using an SGP4 to find
passes). We will specifically test that at the highest point of a pass the link is up (elev > 0).
If GS1 has min_elev 5°, the link might come up slightly after rise and go down before set,
which we check. 
SatLeo2 similarly, if included, perhaps on a different orbit or offset in phase, to show
possibly when SatLeo1 is out of view, SatLeo2 might come in later, etc. This tests multiple
satellites scenario. The ground station can handle both but one at a time in reality. Our
simulation might show times they overlap as both available. This is fine as an output; we
just note it. 
UT1 and SatLeo1 link: UT1 might be located such that it has visibility at different times.
For instance, if UT1 is far from GS1, maybe Leo1 passes over UT1 at a different time. This
can demonstrate a user terminal coverage event. We’ll verify UT1-SatLeo1 link availability
changes as well. 

Wired link GS1-INET: should be always on, so regardless of satellite status, GS1 to internet is up.
Thus whenever a satellite is linked to GS1, effectively the user could reach internet (two-hop
path). We ensure GS1-INET link remains available in all logs. If we simulate a failure, e.g. break
that link at some point, then all flows would break; but we might not do that in this normal
scenario test, it's more for separate impairment test. 

• 

◦ 

◦ 
◦ 
◦ 

◦ 

• 

• 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

• 

24


--- Page Break ---

Assertions/Checks: We will run the simulation for a full period (e.g. one orbit of LEO ~ 90 min).
During the run:

Count how many times each link changes state and ensure it’s plausible (e.g. Leo1-GS1 link:
maybe ~ once per orbit it should go up then down).
Ensure no spurious toggles (e.g. not flapping too frequently – should only toggle when geometry
dictates).
Check that Geo1-GS1 link remains constantly available (no toggles at all).
If UT1 is included: check UT1-Leo1 link toggles at times (depending on UT location).
Also confirm that at no time is there a link declared available that shouldn’t be: for example, if
SatLeo1 is below horizon, link is off. We can cross-validate one event: when our sim says “Leo1-
GS1 up at time T”, compute roughly the elevation at T to see if > 0. These are sanity checks (or
even write an assertion if we calculate it within test).
Multi-link concurrency: if both Leo1 and Leo2 are above horizon together (rare if orbits different
RAAN maybe one after other, but if by chance overlap a bit), the test would catch that both links
are true simultaneously. This is fine; we just note it. If our design had incorrectly enforced single-
beam, we’d see one drop – but we expect no drop.

Performance: This test also mildly checks performance with multiple links – the simulation
should handle it without lag (we might run with small time steps, ensure it iterates fine).

Result Logging: For human verification, we will log statements like: 

Time 00:30:00: link Leo1-GS1 UP (elev=45°), link Leo2-GS1 DOWN, link 
Geo1-GS1 UP, link UT1-Leo1 UP, ...
Time 00:45:00: link Leo1-GS1 DOWN (sat set), ...

But for automated testing, we collect states and assert conditions described.

This integrated test essentially demonstrates that the  constellation connectivity graph behaves as
expected: e.g. at some time, Leo1 is connected to ground which is connected to internet, so end-to-end
path exists; later that path goes away when Leo1 sets.

2. Edge Integration: Frequency Mismatch and Validation
Construct a scenario where two interfaces with incompatible frequency bands are erroneously linked, to
see if our system handles it: - E.g., define SatX with a Ka-band transceiver, GS1 with Ku-band transceiver,
and a link between them. Our link creation should ideally catch this and either not create the link (error)
or mark it as never available. - We test that the simulator does not treat it as available at any time (since
frequencies don’t match). Possibly we print a warning “Link X has incompatible frequencies – will remain
down”. - This is more of a validation test than a physical simulation. If implemented, it’s good to ensure
the check works.

3. Impairment Scheduling Test (if scheduling not implemented, skip, but at least manual toggle): - We
simulate a scenario with a single satellite-ground link. We then manually disable the ground station at a
certain simulation time (maybe by calling an API or directly setting the flag in code at time T_impair). -
Verify that after T_impair, the link immediately goes down (even if geometry was fine). - Then re-enable
and see link come back next pass. - This can be done in a controlled loop: - Run sim until t = T_impair - δ,
ensure link is up. - At t = T_impair, set interface impaired = True. - Continue sim: link goes down. - At t =
T_impair + some Δ, clear impairment. - When satellite comes back in view later, link goes up again. - This

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

25


--- Page Break ---

shows the simulator responds to runtime changes not just geometry. It’s likely more for later scopes
(failover behavior in scheduling), but we can test the mechanism now.

The Test-Driven Development approach means we will write the above tests first (likely using a testing
framework  like  pytest  or  unittest  in  Python).  Each  test  corresponds  to  a  clearly  defined

requirement (traceable to our objectives list). We will then implement the functionality to make these
tests pass, one by one. This ensures that we meet all requirements and catch any regression in the
logic.

Libraries, Tools and Protocols

To implement Scope 2 effectively, we will leverage appropriate libraries and follow relevant protocols/
standards:

Orbit Propagation: Continue using the SGP4 library integrated in Scope 1
 for satellite orbital
updates. We already have this in place; no change needed except to ensure we can get ECEF
coordinates for satellites (if not already done). We might add a utility to convert SGP4’s TEME
output to ECEF. For that conversion, we could use a library like AstroPy or Skyfield to get Earth’s
rotation (GMST) for the given time. However, to minimize dependencies, we might implement a
simple Greenwich sidereal time formula ourselves for conversion. The accuracy needed is
modest (a fraction of a degree error in position yields minimal impact on LoS determination).
Coordinate Calculations: We will use NumPy for vector and matrix operations to simplify the
math for checking angles and distances. NumPy’s array operations will let us calculate dot
products and norms cleanly, which reduces the chance of manual math errors and improves
performance if computing many links at once.
Earth Geometry: If high precision is desired, we might incorporate WGS-84 ellipsoid for
elevation calculations. A library like PyProj could transform lat/long to ECEF precisely. In Scope 2,
a simple spherical model is acceptable, but PyProj is a fallback if needed for coordinate
conversions. We likely won’t need it if we write our own given lat, lon (since formula for ECEF
from lat, lon, alt is straightforward).
Logging: Use Python’s built-in logging  module (as likely set up in Scope 1) to record

connectivity events. We’ll possibly define a logger for “ConnectivityService” and use levels INFO
for link up/down events and DEBUG for more detailed geometry data. This aligns with good
practice to have tunable verbosity and traceability.
Data Modeling: If the project uses Python, we can use dataclasses  for NetworkInterface,

TransceiverModel, etc., to automatically generate init and repr, making the code cleaner. If using
an object database or similar (maybe not, since likely in-memory), dataclasses suffice. In a static
language like Java or C++, we’d define these classes normally. The key is to structure them clearly
as per the design.
Protocols & API Alignment: We have the Aalyria Spacetime API ( api-main.zip  provided). We

should use it as a reference for field names and allowed values:
e.g. use the same enumerations for interface medium (if possible), same structures for Link (the
NBI defines NetworkLink  and BidirectionalLink  messages). We might even consider

using the proto definitions directly by compiling them and using the generated classes in our
sim. This would ensure exact alignment. For example, the proto NetworkLink  has fields for 

radio_config  etc. We can choose to either use those protos or create our own classes that

mirror them. Given the simulator is our own code, it might be simpler to define our classes and
just ensure similar naming. We could import constants like modulation modes from the proto to
avoid retyping them.

• 
9

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

26


--- Page Break ---

Using the actual protos may be more relevant when we implement the gRPC interface in
Scope 3, at which time we can integrate more tightly. For Scope 2, referencing them is enough.
Spacetime Simulation API: Also note Spacetime has a Simulation API for scenario definition
(maybe in simulation.proto ). We might glean some insight from it to ensure our concept of

“Scenario” and how we group nodes/links aligns. Possibly the Simulation API allows posting a
scenario with all nodes, links, etc. We’ve essentially built that concept in our KB. We remain
aligned by treating our scenario as the collection of nodes/links which is what Spacetime expects
.
Mathematical Libraries: If needed, use math  module for trig (sin, cos, etc.). For computing

sidereal time, might need some constants (Earth rotation rate).
SGP4: Already covered, but ensure we have latest version (some have minor differences in
output).
Unit Testing Framework: Use unittest  or pytest  in Python. We will likely go with 

pytest  for its ease of writing parametric tests, etc. We will also use assertions with tolerances

for floating comparisons (like elevation angle ~0).
Continuous Integration: If set up, we add these tests to CI to automatically run them. (Not a
library per se, but part of development rigor).

Performance  Tools:  Not  needed  at  this  stage,  but  if  we  wanted  to  simulate  a  very  large
constellation,  we  might  consider  optimizing  the  geometry  checks.  Possibly  using  NumPy’s
vectorization  to  compute  LoS  for  many  links  at  once,  or  employing  spatial  indexing  (like
grouping satellites by visibility region). At our current scope, not necessary, but we mention it as
a forward-looking note.

Standard Protocols: The simulation doesn’t directly interface with network protocols at this
stage (since we are not sending actual packets). However, being “Spacetime-compatible” implies
we respect certain standards:

CCSDS standards: The requirements mention DTN (Delay Tolerant Networking) with Bundle
Protocol 7 etc.
, and mention DVB-S2X, etc. These inform our field choices but we are not
implementing the protocols themselves here. We ensure our design can accommodate them
(e.g. storing is_disruption_tolerant in service requests, and modulation schemes in radio config).
Time system: We should use a precise time representation (likely UNIX epoch or a datetime) for
simulation time, which might matter if converting to real world time for orbital calcs. For
consistency, we use the same epoch as SGP4 expects (likely UTC). Use of Python’s datetime

and perhaps astropy.time  if needed for conversions (or just manual if not).

Units: We will stick to SI units internally (positions in meters, time in seconds, angles in degrees
for human input but convert to rad for math). Document these clearly to avoid confusion.

In summary, the main libraries we will leverage are the SGP4 orbital library, NumPy for vector math,
and possibly  pyproj  or  astropy  for coordinate transforms if needed. We align with  Protobuf

definitions from Aalyria’s API to ensure our implementation’s data model can be directly mapped to the
Spacetime API objects.

Error Handling, Logging, and Metrics

Robust error handling and clear logging are crucial to a “world-class” simulator backend:

Input Validation Errors: As we parse scenario definitions and set up interfaces/links, we will
validate and throw explicit errors for any inconsistencies:
If a link references an unknown interface or node, we raise an error indicating the bad reference.

• 

• 

35

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

38
39

• 

• 

• 

• 

27


--- Page Break ---

If two interfaces of different mediums are linked (one wired, one wireless) – which is logically
invalid – we either prevent it or interpret it as meaning a misconfigured scenario. We will likely
treat it as invalid input and log an error. (Alternatively, one could imagine a scenario linking a
wireless interface to a wired interface to simulate a “gateway” where one end is actually some
modem – but that should be modeled as two interfaces on one node rather than a direct link. So
we will not allow cross-medium link direct connections.)
If frequency bands do not overlap between two wireless interfaces on a link, we log a warning
and mark the link as never available. This is not a crash scenario, but we output a message so
the user knows that link will never come up due to incompatible frequencies. (In later scopes,
perhaps a frequency conversion payload could be modeled, but that’s beyond scope.)
If an interface is added to a node with an ID that already exists, log error and prevent
duplication.
If a ground station’s min_elev is not provided, assume default. If provided and > 90°, or <0°,
clamp it or warn (invalid values).
If transceiver model ID on an interface is not found in the model registry, log error and either fail
scenario load or set a default model as fallback and warn.

All such messages will be collected and either thrown as exceptions (to not start simulation with
bad config) or at least clearly logged so the user can fix the scenario.

Runtime Errors: During simulation:

The geometry calculations should be safe (no division by zero except possibly in degenerate
cases like two identical satellite positions, which won’t happen unless a satellite coincides, but
even then our line-of-sight function would handle gracefully).
We must guard against numerical issues: e.g. floating precision causing an elevation of -0.0001°
which is essentially 0. We might treat any elevation < 0 as 0 for availability (or require strictly >
minElev). We will define that clearly (maybe require elevation >= min_elev to be available, i.e.
equal to threshold counts as available or not? We likely say > or >= – we can choose >= so that if
min_elev = 0, horizon exactly yields available; if user wants strictly above horizon, they can set
min_elev a fraction above 0).
If the SGP4 propagation fails for some TLE (maybe TLE is expired and SGP4 returns an error or
NaNs), our orbit update might produce an invalid position. We should detect that (position with
NaN or absurd values) and mark any links involving that satellite as down, and log an error like
“Satellite X position invalid at time Y – propagator error”. The simulation should continue (other
satellites unaffected) rather than crashing. This is partly Scope 1’s concern, but Scope 2 will
propagate the effect to connectivity (so we should ensure we handle an invalid position by not
attempting to compute crazy geometry).
The connectivity update itself is not expected to throw exceptions normally. We’ll make sure to
handle things like the case of missing platform (as discussed) by logging and skipping.

If any unexpected error occurs in the update loop (e.g. due to a bug), we will catch exceptions at
the top level of  update_all_links  to prevent the simulation from freezing. We can log a

critical error with the stack trace and attempt to continue next tick. (Better the sim limps than
dies, especially in a long run – though we prefer to fix bugs rather than rely on this.)

Logging:

We will implement informational logs for key events:
When each link becomes available or unavailable (with timestamp and possibly reason if
easily determined, e.g. “Link X down (out of range)” or “Link Y up (LoS established)”).

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

◦ 

28


--- Page Break ---

We can throttle logs to avoid flooding. E.g., if updating every second, logging every link
every second is too much. Instead, we log on state changes. This requires storing
previous state (which we have in link object). We’ll do: 

if new_status != old_status: log(info) .

Also log once at scenario initialization listing all defined links and their parameters, so the
user sees the configured network (frequencies, etc.).
Log any warnings as discussed (invalid configs).
Debug logs: We may add a debug-level log with geometry details for one or two links if needed
(but not for all links each tick, that’s too verbose). Possibly allow enabling debug for a specific
link ID to trace its elevation over time – useful for developers. But that might be beyond initial
need; a developer can instrument manually or examine outputs.

Metrics: We can keep counters such as:

total_links = N , wired_links = X, wireless_links = Y .

In each tick, count active_links . We could output a high-level metric like “Time T:

active_links = M out of N”. This can help quickly see connectivity percentage. If integrated
with a monitoring system, these metrics could track network availability.
For each link, we could measure the fraction of time it was available during a scenario
(this could be computed after the run by analyzing logs or by incremental count: e.g. each
tick add dt if available). This is more of a post-simulation analytics, but we could include
an option to accumulate that. For now, we might not implement in code, but we plan for
it (the design can easily add it).
Performance metrics: how long the connectivity update takes each tick (if we wanted to
optimize). We can measure time at start and end of update_all_links and log at debug if it
exceeds some threshold. Given likely small N, it’s fine. But as project scales, we consider
it.

Extensibility & Rigor:

We maintain rigorous separation of concerns: The connectivity logic does not alter platform
motions or other state beyond links. This makes debugging easier (we know a bug in
connectivity won’t mess orbits).
We will double-check consistency: e.g. if a bidirectional link’s one side was updated and not the
other, we add a final consistency step to copy state (though if our code updates both directional
links in one go, it’s consistent by design).
At the end of Scope 2 implementation, we will review if all requirements marked for Scope 2 are
indeed covered or explicitly deferred:
Network interfaces & transceivers – fully implemented
.
Link, Beam & connectivity – partially implemented: we have links and connectivity but
beams (pointing/scheduling) are not yet. We document which parts are stubbed (e.g.
multi-beam concurrency, adaptive modulation, link budgets beyond geometry).
This transparency ensures the “world-class rigor”: any functionality not implemented is
acknowledged and either stub-return or logged as “Not implemented in this version”
when called.
We incorporate small comments referencing future scope features, e.g. “TODO: enforce
max_beams in scheduling phase” to not forget.

Testing will include intentionally bad scenarios to see that errors are caught and logged, not silently
ignored (unless harmless). We will ensure the simulator fails fast on critical configuration errors, and on
runtime issues it either recovers or logs clearly.

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

• 

• 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

◦ 

• 

• 

• 

• 

◦ 
40

◦ 

◦ 

• 

29


--- Page Break ---

Finally, after thorough testing and debugging, we will have confidence that a developer can run the
simulator with a complex scenario and get correct connectivity behavior. The documentation (this plan
and code comments) will enable them to further build on it – for example, a developer implementing
Scope 3 (which might involve the Northbound API and user traffic flows) can see exactly how to retrieve
connectivity info, or how to add new interface types.

Conclusion

By implementing Scope 2 as outlined, we add a crucial layer to the constellation simulator: the ability to
represent  each  node’s  interfaces  and  dynamically  evaluate  connectivity.  The  modules  defined
(NetworkInterface, TransceiverModel, NetworkLink, ConnectivityService, etc.) directly fulfill the Scope 2
requirements
 and set the stage for subsequent scopes. The system will now maintain a time-
varying network topology graph that reflects real orbital motion and basic physics constraints (line-of-

sight). This provides a solid foundation for Scope 3 and Scope 4, where we will introduce user flows,
routing decisions, and active link scheduling. All design decisions have been made with extensibility in
mind – for example, by stubbing out advanced fields (like link quality metrics) and aligning with
Spacetime’s API models, we ensure that adding features like link budget calculation, dynamic beam
control, or routing algorithms can be done incrementally without redesign. 

The  implementation  plan  above,  with  its  clear  breakdown  and  rigorous  detail,  should  enable  a
developer (or team) to begin coding Scope 2 immediately and systematically, using the specified tests
as a guide. Upon completion of Scope 2, the simulator will achieve Roadmap v0.1 capability – it will
support a simple static scenario with orbit propagation (from Scope 1) and now also compute which
links are up as satellites move
. This demonstrates that the simulator is progressing toward being
fully  Spacetime-compatible,  adhering  to  world-class  standards  for  modularity  and  accuracy.  All
requirements targeted in Scope 2 will be satisfied, and the system will be ready for the next phases
(adding traffic handling, control-plane integration, etc.) with confidence in the robustness of the core
networking model. 

Sources:

Requirements Document for Aalyria Spacetime-Compatible Simulator
 (network
interfaces, transceivers, wired link assumptions) 
Development Roadmap for Simulator (Scope 2 goals: interface definitions and LoS connectivity) 
Architecture Specification
 (connectivity service line-of-sight logic and range/coverage
assumptions) 
Scope 1 Implementation Plan
 (context of interfaces stubs in Scope 1, scenario baseline) 
Aalyria public API references (for alignment with NetworkInterface, NetworkLink definitions)
.

Roadmap for Spacetime-Compatible Constellation Simulator
Development.pdf

file://file_00000000541c7206a67b773409b72c28

Requirements for an
Aalyria Spacetime-Compatible Constellation Simulator.pdf

file://file_0000000056b871faaec4ce4c5e567993

Architecture for a Spacetime-Compatible Constellation Simulator.pdf

file://file_000000009e44720799a541f2cf93f77a

41
40

42

• 
21
5
6
7

• 
• 
33
8

• 
37
12

• 
29

1
2
3
4
9
10
11
15
34
40
41
42

5
6
7
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
35
36
38
39

8
32

30


--- Page Break ---

Scope 1 Implementation Plan_ Core Entities & Orbital Dynamics.pdf

file://file_00000000b3c47209aa09177fed7c1ea1

Scope 1 Implementation Plan_ Core Entities & Orbital Dynamics.pdf

file://file_000000008d447207bd1eb280e59f4c76

Requirements for an Aalyria Spacetime-Compatible Constellation Simulator.pdf

file://file_0000000058407206a1f0d66f1b1e61c7

Architecture for a Spacetime-Compatible Constellation Simulator.pdf

file://file_000000000ac47207829eeb8ec2dd94b2

12

13
14
37

16

33

31

