Scope 1 Implementation Plan: Core Entities &
Orbital Dynamics

Module Breakdown

In  Scope 1, we implement the foundational modules of the simulation – focusing on core entities
(platforms and nodes) and orbital motion. The architecture will consist of loosely-coupled components
with clear responsibilities and interfaces
. A central Knowledge Base will store all state, and each
component will interact through well-defined APIs or events. Below is a breakdown of the key modules:

Platform & NetworkNode Data Models

Responsibilities: Define data structures for physical platforms and logical network nodes, mirroring
Aalyria Spacetime’s core entities. These classes hold all static properties and dynamic state (position,
etc.) of assets in the constellation
. They primarily serve as containers for data, with minimal logic
beyond accessors.

Public Interfaces: These are plain data classes (or structs in Go) with public fields (or getter/setters) for
each attribute. They will be used throughout the simulation and via APIs (e.g. NBI) as the primary data
contracts
.  Key  interfaces  include:  -  Constructors  or  factory  functions  to  create  a
PlatformDefinition or NetworkNode from config (e.g. from proto or JSON inputs). - Methods to link a
NetworkNode  to  a  Platform  (e.g.  node.AttachToPlatform(platformID) ).  -  (Optionally)  helper

methods for convenience (e.g. node.IsMobile()  based on type, etc.).

Dependencies: No  external  dependencies  beyond  basic  types  –  these  models  align  with  Aalyria’s
protobuf definitions
. They may depend on common types like coordinates or time (for position/orbit
data). They do not themselves perform computation – other modules (e.g. orbit propagator) will update
their fields. This separation ensures they remain simple data containers (following the Entity definitions
from Spacetime).

Knowledge Base (State Store)

Responsibilities: Maintain an in-memory store of all entities (platforms and nodes), providing thread-
safe access and update mechanisms
. The Knowledge Base (KB) acts as the source of truth for
simulation state at any time, analogous to Spacetime’s knowledge base of entities
. It handles: -
Storage: Keep dictionaries/mappings of PlatformDefinition and NetworkNode objects keyed by their
IDs (unique identifiers). - Lookup & Listing: Provide APIs to retrieve a platform or node by ID, or list all
of them (or by type/category). - Updates: Expose methods to add new entities (e.g. when a scenario is
initialized)  and  to  update  fields  (especially  coordinates  each  tick).  -  Linking: Manage  associations
between nodes and platforms. For example, if a node is attached to a platform, store that relationship
so the node’s position can be derived from its platform
. - Observability: Optionally, notify observers
of changes. The KB can implement an observer pattern or pub-sub mechanism: e.g. when a platform’s
position is updated, it can emit an event or invoke callbacks for any listeners (such as a telemetry logger
or a connectivity module in later scopes)
.

1

2

3
4

3

4

5
6

7

8

1


--- Page Break ---

Public  Interfaces: -  AddPlatform(p  *PlatformDefinition)  error :  Insert  a  new  platform

(returns error if ID conflict). - AddNetworkNode(n *NetworkNode) error : Insert a new node (error

if conflict). If  n  references a platform, the KB can validate that the platform exists and store the

linkage. - GetPlatform(id string) *PlatformDefinition : Fetch a platform by ID (or return nil if

not  found).  -
 GetNetworkNode(id  string)  *NetworkNode :  Fetch  a  node  by  ID.  -

ListPlatforms() []PlatformDefinition  and ListNetworkNodes() []NetworkNode : Return

copies  or  snapshots  of  all  entities  for  external  inspection  (to  avoid  direct  modification).  -

UpdatePlatformPosition(id string, coord Motion) : Update a platform’s coordinates in a

thread-safe manner, and also update any derived data (e.g. notify linked node or trigger observer
events). -  Subscribe(func(Event)) (unsubscribe func()) : Allow registration of listeners for

state changes (e.g. a callback for “platform moved” events or general entity updates).

Dependencies: The KB may use synchronization primitives (mutex/RWMutex) from the Go runtime for
thread safety. It does not depend on external databases in Scope 1 (data can be transient in-memory).
All interactions with KB are via its API or events; modules like the time controller or orbit propagator will
call these methods to read/update state.

Simulation Time Controller

Responsibilities: Govern the advancement of simulation time and orchestrate the periodic update loop
. The Time Controller handles  tick generation (the simulation “heartbeat”) in either real-time or
accelerated modes. It provides control over starting, pausing, and stopping the simulation, as well as
adjusting the speed (time scale).

Key responsibilities: - Time Keeping: Maintain the current simulation time (e.g. as a time.Time  or

simulation timestamp) and a simulation epoch start. In real-time mode, this might track wall-clock
alignment; in accelerated mode, it calculates time progression faster than wall clock. - Tick Scheduling:
Emit ticks at a fixed step or variable step. For example, a default could be 1-second simulation time per
tick. It may use a goroutine with a time.Ticker  for real-time mode (tick every 1 second) and a tight

loop or short sleeps for accelerated mode. - Mode Management: Support at least two modes – real-
time  (1x) where  simulation  time  progresses  in  sync  with  wall  clock,  and  accelerated where  the
simulation runs as fast as possible or at a specified faster rate
. In accelerated mode, the controller
might increment time in discrete steps (e.g. 1-second or 1-minute steps) without waiting for real time to
pass. - Pause/Resume: Provide a way to pause the simulation (freeze the simulation clock and suspend
tick events) and resume it. Pausing could be implemented by suspending the ticker/loop (e.g. not
advancing time or sending tick signals until resumed). The controller should maintain state (running/
paused)  and  ensure  a  clean  resume  (no  lost  time  accumulation).  -  Tick  Broadcast: Notify  other
components on each tick. The Time Controller can maintain a list of registered tick listeners (e.g. the
Orbit Propagation module, future link calculators, etc.). On every tick, it calls each listener or broadcasts
an event that a new time step is available. This decouples the time loop from specific update logic.

Public Interfaces: - Start(realTime bool, step time.Duration, scale float64) : Begin the

simulation loop. Parameters might specify mode: e.g. realTime=true  for wall-clock sync, or scale

for acceleration factor, etc. A default step (like 1s) can be used for tick granularity. - Pause() error  /

Resume() error : Pause or continue the simulation. On pause, the controller might simply set an

internal flag and stop emitting ticks; on resume, it recalculates the next tick time. - Stop() : Gracefully

stop the simulation loop (terminate the goroutine). - Now() time.Time : Get the current simulation

time  (could  also  be  accessed  via  global  state  or  passed  in  tick  events).  -

AddTickListener(func(simTime  time.Time)) :  Register  a  callback  to  be  invoked  each  tick

9

9

2


--- Page Break ---

(returns an unsubscribe handle). - Possibly SetRate(scale float64) : Dynamically adjust the speed

(not strictly required for Scope 1 but a consideration).

Dependencies: Uses Go’s time utilities and concurrency (goroutines, channels or locks) to schedule
ticks.  Integrates  with  the  Orbit  Propagation  module  (which  will  register  a  tick  listener)  and  the
Knowledge Base (which may be updated on each tick). The design should avoid tight coupling – e.g. the
controller doesn’t directly update orbits, it merely signals others to do so, consistent with an event-
driven  design
.  This  modular  approach  allows  replacing  the  time  mechanism  or  adjusting  tick
frequency without altering other modules.

Orbit Propagation & Motion Models

Responsibilities: Update  the  position  (and  orientation,  if  applicable)  of  every  platform  each  tick,
according to its motion model
. This module integrates an SGP4 orbital propagator for satellites
and provides a strategy interface for different motion types. It ensures all platform coordinates in the
Knowledge Base are refreshed based on the current simulation time.

This module can be structured around a PlatformMotion interface (strategy pattern) that defines how
to compute the platform’s position: 

type MotionModel interface {
UpdatePosition(simTime time.Time, platform *PlatformDefinition)
}

Each PlatformDefinition is associated with one MotionModel implementation, chosen based on the
platform’s configuration (orbital, static, etc.). The Orbit Propagation module manages these models and
coordinates their use on each tick.

Key motion model strategies: - Static Position Model: For fixed platforms (e.g. ground stations), this
model leaves the position unchanged every tick. The PlatformDefinition’s coordinates are set once (e.g.
from a known lat/long or ECEF coordinate) and the UpdatePosition simply does nothing (or ensures it
remains constant). Orientation can also remain constant (e.g. a ground station might have a fixed
orientation pointing upward). - Orbital (SGP4) Model: For satellites with TLE data, this model uses an
SGP4 library to compute the ECEF position at the given simulation time
. On each tick, it calculates
the  satellite’s  position  vector  (X,  Y,  Z  in  Earth-Centered  Earth-Fixed  frame)  from  the  TLE  orbital
parameters and current time. We will integrate a proven SGP4 implementation (via a Go library or
binding to Orekit/Python if necessary)
. The model will likely store precomputed state from the TLE
(e.g. mean motion, orbital elements) in an internal struct when initialized, so that each UpdatePosition
call is efficient. Orientation for satellites can be left as a default (e.g. align with velocity or NADIR
pointing) – for Scope 1, we will include an orientation field but not actively simulate attitude changes
(just set a sensible default or identity rotation). - Scripted / External Motion Model: For moving but
non-orbital objects (e.g. aircraft, drones, or hypothetical moving user terminals), this model updates
position based on an external source or predefined trajectory
. In Scope 1, we can support a simple
scripted trajectory: for example, a list of waypoints or a function of time. Alternatively, this model can be
a stub that always returns the last externally provided position. For now, we will allow injection of
position  data  via  an  API  or  test  hook  –  e.g.  an  external  thread  can  call

KnowledgeBase.UpdatePlatformPosition()  for  a  platform,  and  the  external  motion  model’s

UpdatePosition might simply accept those updates (or read from a shared data structure). Essentially, if

8

10

11

12

13

3


--- Page Break ---

a platform’s motion_source  is marked as external or unknown, we either treat it as static or allow

manual updates. This sets the stage for later integration of live data (like ADS-B for aircraft)
.

The Orbit Propagation module itself acts as a tick listener on the Time Controller. On each tick event, it
will: 1. Iterate over all PlatformDefinitions in the Knowledge Base (or maintain its own list of platform
IDs). 2. For each platform, call the associated MotionModel’s UpdatePosition(currentSimTime, 

platform) .  3.  Write  the  updated  coordinates  back  to  the  PlatformDefinition  (and  thus  into  the

Knowledge Base). This might be done via a  KnowledgeBase.UpdatePlatformPosition()  call to

ensure thread safety and to trigger any observers
. 4. (Optional) If certain significant events occur
(e.g. satellite passes over a ground station), the module could emit events. In Scope 1, we will defer
event logic; instead, we ensure positions are correct, and we rely on future connectivity logic to
consume them.

SGP4  Integration  Strategy: We  will  use  a  well-tested  SGP4  implementation  to  calculate  orbital
positions
.  Options  include:  -  Using  a  Go  library  (if  available)  for  SGP4/TLE  propagation.  -
Wrapping a C/C++ or Python implementation via cgo or gRPC if needed (since accuracy is crucial). - As
an interim step, for testing, we might use the Python  sgp4  library (via cgo or by generating an

ephemeris table) – but ultimately, a direct Go integration is preferred for performance
.

The integration will parse the TLE strings (two-line element set defining the orbit) for each satellite
platform at initialization. Each PlatformDefinition with orbital motion will store either the TLE lines or
the parsed orbital elements. The MotionModel for that platform will use these to initialize an SGP4
propagator instance. On each tick, we compute the satellite’s position at simulation time. We must
convert the resulting coordinates into ECEF frame
 (SGP4 typically yields position in TEME or an
inertial frame; we will convert to ECEF so that all platforms share a common frame). The result is set into
the Platform’s coordinates  (Motion) field.

Public Interfaces: This module might not be heavily exposed publicly (it works behind the scenes), but
for completeness: -  RegisterPlatformMotion(platformID, model) : Associate a motion model

with  a  platform  (called  during  scenario  setup).  -  UpdateAllPositions(currentTime) :  Method

called  on  each  tick  to  update  every  platform.  -  For  testing  or  external  updates,  possibly

SetTLE(platformID, tle1, tle2)  to update a platform’s orbit data at runtime (so new TLEs can

be ingested and the MotionModel for that satellite updated accordingly)
. - Utility functions like
coordinate conversions (e.g. ECEF <-> geodetic) as needed for output or verification.

Dependencies: Depends on the Time Controller for tick events and on the Knowledge Base for reading
initial states and writing updates. Also depends on the SGP4 library and potentially a small math/geo
utility (for coordinate transforms, vector calculations). This module should be modular so that new
motion models can be added easily (e.g. if we later incorporate more complex orbital mechanics or
launch trajectories)
. 

Data Models and Enums (Scope 1 Entities)

Scope 1 defines two primary entity types: PlatformDefinition (physical platform) and NetworkNode
(logical node). These correspond closely to Aalyria’s proto messages and will include fields aligned with
those definitions. We also incorporate relevant enums and sub-structures (like motion sources, routing
settings) to ensure compatibility and future expansion. The tables below enumerate the required fields,
their types, and their purpose/rationale:

13

8

14
12

15

11

16

17

4


--- Page Break ---

PlatformDefinition Data Model

Field
Type
Description / Rationale

id
string

Unique platform identifier (primary key). Not explicitly
in Aalyria’s PlatformDefinition  proto message,

but required in our simulation to uniquely reference
the platform
. This ID will be used to link nodes to
platforms and to query the platform in the KB. In
Spacetime’s NBI, the Entity.id  plus an EntityType

designates a platform
. Our simulation can
generate or use provided IDs.

name
string (optional)

Human-readable name for the platform
. Used
for logging, UI, or debugging. Example: 

"Satellite-A"  or "GroundStation-1" .

type
string (optional)

A type label or category tag for the platform
.
This can describe the role or kind of platform (e.g. 

"SATELLITE" , "GROUND_STATION" , 

"AIRCRAFT" ). In Aalyria’s proto, type  is a

freeform string often used similarly to category (for
UI or logic tags)
. We will use it to classify
platforms, which can trigger domain-specific behavior
(e.g. a "SATELLITE"  might require an orbital

motion model, a "GROUND_STATION"  remains fixed)

.

category_tag
string (optional)

An additional tag or category classifier
. Could be
used for grouping or styling in a UI (not heavily used
in core logic for now). We will accept and store it for
completeness.

coordinates
Motion
(structure)

The platform’s position and orientation state in ECEF
frame
. This can include fields like ECEF position (x,
y, z in meters) and orientation (e.g. quaternion or
Euler angles relative to ECEF axes). In Aalyria’s 

PlatformDefinition , this is a Motion  message

which may contain position and possibly velocity/
orientation
. In our implementation, we can define
a Motion  struct (with fields like 

X, Y, Z float64  for coordinates and perhaps 

Quaternion  for orientation). The orientation

portion will initially be kept default (e.g. identity
orientation, or pointing to Earth’s center for satellites)
since we are not simulating attitude in Scope 1. The
coordinates will be updated every tick for moving
platforms
.

4

18
19

20
21

20
22

20

23

24

25

25

11

5


--- Page Break ---

Field
Type
Description / Rationale

motion_source
enum 

MotionSource

Indicates how the platform’s motion is determined
. Values align with Aalyria’s proto: e.g. 

UNKNOWN_SOURCE (0)  for manual or unspecified, 

SPACETRACK_ORG (1)  for automatic TLE-based

updates, FLIGHTRADAR_24 (2)  for aircraft via ADS-

B feed
. In our simulator, this field is mostly
informational in Scope 1 (we won’t automatically
fetch external data in this phase), but we will set it
accordingly. If motion_source == 

SPACETRACK_ORG , it implies we expect to use TLE

propagation for this platform (which we do). If an
aircraft, we might set FLIGHTRADAR_24  to indicate

a live feed could be used later
.

motion_ref_id
string (optional)

Reference to a MotionDefinition  ID if an external

motion profile is used
. Aalyria uses this to
decouple motion data from the platform (advanced
usage). For Scope 1, we do not implement separate
motion definitions; if provided, we can log or ignore
it. Our simulation will primarily use the embedded 

coordinates  or TLE. We’ll store this field to remain

schema-compatible, but if it’s set, we will treat it as
“external motion provided” and likely not use the
static coordinates (per Aalyria semantics
).
Possibly we interpret it as a signal that an external
source will drive the position, so our Orbit module
could skip updating this platform unless externally
triggered.

norad_id
uint32 (optional)

The NORAD catalog ID of the satellite
. If 

motion_source  indicates TLE updates, this ID

identifies which satellite to fetch updates for. In our
simulator, we don’t auto-fetch TLEs in Scope 1, but we
store norad_id for completeness and potential
verification (we could use it to cross-check the TLE
corresponds to this NORAD ID).

transceiver_model
list of
TransceiverModel

(Stub for Scope 1) List of radio transceiver hardware
models on this platform
. We will include this field
to accept scenario data (if provided), but we do not
simulate any transceiver behavior in Scope 1. It’s a
placeholder for later use in link budget calculations.
We can keep it as a list of structs (with fields like
frequency bands, gain, etc., as defined in Aalyria API).
For now, these will just be stored and potentially
logged.

26

27

27

28

28

29

30

6


--- Page Break ---

Field
Type
Description / Rationale

bent_pipe_payloads
list of
BentPipePayload

(Stub for Scope 1) Any bent-pipe repeater payloads on
the platform
. Similar to transceiver models, we
will store this info if provided, but not actively used
yet. This could represent, for example, a satellite’s
relay payload. No processing logic in this phase.

adsb_transponder
AdsbTransponder
(optional)

(Aircraft-specific, stub) If the platform is an aircraft,
this may contain ADS-B information (like 24-bit
address, flight number)
. We will include the
structure to be schema-complete. In Scope 1 it’s not
used unless we integrate live ADS-B later. For now,
likely not present in typical LEO/GEO scenarios.

Rationale: The PlatformDefinition model encapsulates all physical attributes of assets like satellites or
ground stations
. We include fields even if they are not fully utilized in Scope 1 to align with the
Aalyria API and make sure the data model is ready for later scopes (e.g. transceiver details for link
simulation in Scope 2+). Many of these fields will be accepted and stored  as placeholders, per the
Scope 1 simplifications: e.g. payloads, power, storage are recorded but not yet enforced
. The
critical fields for Scope 1 operation are the ID, name/type, and coordinates (with motion parameters)
, which enable the simulation to track each platform’s position over time.

NetworkNode Data Model

Field
Type
Description / Rationale

id (node_id)
string

Unique identifier for the network node
. This is
analogous to node_id  in Aalyria’s NetworkNode

proto. It distinguishes the node in the Knowledge Base
and is used to refer to the node in APIs or when linking
to interfaces, etc. In our design, node IDs might be
distinct from platform IDs (they exist in a separate
namespace since a platform and node can share a
name but represent different layers).

name
string (optional)

Human-friendly name of the node
, e.g. 

"SatA_CommsSubsystem"  or "Gateway01 

Router" . Just for display/logging.

type
string (optional)

Node type label or role, similar to platform type
.
We use this to classify nodes (e.g. 

"SATELLITE_NODE" , "GROUND_STATION_NODE" , 

"USER_TERMINAL_NODE" , 

"INFRASTRUCTURE_NODE" ). This is not an enum in

the proto, just a string tag. Scenario definitions often
use such tags for clarity
. Our simulator can use this
field to decide default behaviors: e.g. a "SATELLITE"

node might automatically expect an associated moving
platform, whereas a "GROUND_STATION"  node might

default to static platform. It’s mainly metadata.

31

32

33
2

34
35

4

36
37

38

39

40

7


--- Page Break ---

Field
Type
Description / Rationale

category_tag
string (optional)

Another categorical tag for the node
. Like
platform’s category, it may be used for grouping or
visual cues. We include it for completeness, though it’s
not crucial in simulation logic.

platform_ref
string (optional
reference)

Not an explicit proto field, but added in our model: The ID
of the PlatformDefinition that this node is attached to
(if any). In Spacetime, a NetworkNode can optionally be
associated with a platform (physical host)
. Since
the proto doesn’t include a direct field for platform ID,
our Knowledge Base will establish the link. We add a
reference in our Node object for convenience (so 

node.platform_ref = platformID ). If set, this

implies the node’s position is inherited from that
platform’s coordinates. If a node has no associated
platform (e.g. a cloud/ground router not tied to a
location), platform_ref  may be empty and the node

is considered non-spatial in Scope 1.

routing_config
RoutingConfiguration
(optional)

Networking routing parameters
. We include a
sub-structure similar to the proto: it may have fields
like router_id  (an IP routing identifier or ASN), 

node_sid  (Segment ID for segment routing), etc.

These are placeholders in Scope 1 – we will parse/
store them if provided but not perform any routing
logic
. The structure might also hold an 

ek_route_fn  (external routing function reference) as

in the proto. For now, this info is just kept for future
use (routing comes in later scopes).

subnet
list of string (CIDRs)

List of IP subnets or prefixes served by this node
. If
the node acts as a gateway, it might announce these
subnets. We store these for completeness; no behavior
is attached in Scope 1. They could be used in later
networking logic or just documentation of what
networks the node connects.

interfaces
list of
NetworkInterface

The network interfaces attached to this node
. Each 
NetworkInterface would be a structure modeling a
port or transceiver: fields include interface_id

(unique per node), name  (label), ip_address  (if

any), ethernet_address , and possibly mode flags

etc
. In Scope 1, we will define the data structure
and accept interface definitions from scenario input,
but we do not simulate any traffic or link behavior yet.
The presence of interfaces is mainly to prepare for
Scope 2 where links between interfaces will form
connectivity. We ensure each interface has an ID and
can be referenced, and that for now they remain static
entries.

41

42
7

43
44

45

46

47

48
49

8


--- Page Break ---

Field
Type
Description / Rationale

agent
SdnAgent (optional)

SDN agent configuration for this node
. If the
node runs an Aalyria SDN agent, this submessage
defines its control-plane parameters. We include fields
from the proto: e.g. type  (an enum for the CDPI

protocol, like AIRFLOW  or others
), an 

ek_sdn_agent  (reference ID if an external agent

manager exists), and a map 

maximum_control_plane_latency  which maps

priority levels to durations
. In our simulation, all
nodes we control will be considered “SDN-enabled” by
default (meaning the controller can send them
commands)
. We will note these fields but assume
negligible latency unless configured otherwise (one of
the simplifications)
. Essentially, we store the map
but do not delay any commands in Scope 1 – any
control actions are instantaneous (we just log if
needed).

power_budget
list of
SignalPowerBudget

The node’s transmit power constraints
. Each entry
can specify an Interval (time window, or “infinite” if
constant) and an available power in Watts
. This
allows modeling limited power over time. In Scope 1,
we will accept and store any defined power budgets
but not enforce them
. If the simulation were to
schedule transmissions, it would ensure not to exceed
this, but since we have no transmission model yet, we
simply retain this info. If multiple budgets are given,
presumably only one is active for the current time – but
we won’t need to resolve that now. We might log a
warning if a scenario is defined such that a node tries
to use more power than budget (though without a link
simulation, that situation won’t really arise).

storage
Storage (optional)

Onboard storage capacity for DTN (Delay/Disruption
Tolerant Networking)
. This structure has at
least one field: available_bytes  (int64) indicating

how many bytes can be stored for store-and-forward
operation
. If this value is non-negative, it implies
the node is DTN-capable (even 0 or 1 byte means DTN
support, by proto definition)
. We include this to
mark nodes that can buffer data. In Scope 1, we will
track the capacity (and possibly current usage if we
simulate any data flows, which we do not yet) but not
simulate DTN protocols. We simply mark DTN support
if available_bytes >= 0  and ensure not to

“overfill” in any hypothetical usage (which again, is
stubbed out now)
.

Rationale: The NetworkNode model aggregates networking attributes of a device or endpoint in the
constellation
. We closely mirror Aalyria’s fields to allow seamless scenario definition via their API

50
51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59
60

61

62

63
64

33
65

9


--- Page Break ---

or protos. Many fields serve as placeholders in this foundational phase – e.g. routing IDs, interface
details, power budgets – because actual routing, link and DTN logic will be added in later scopes
.  For  now,  the  critical  part  of  a  NetworkNode  in  simulation  is  its  association  with  a
PlatformDefinition (if it has one) and its identity. By linking a node to a platform, the node inherits the
platform’s position in space. This means when a platform moves, any attached node is considered to
move with it (e.g. a satellite’s node moves as the satellite orbits). If a NetworkNode lacks a platform (e.g.
a “Point of Presence” node that represents a remote network with no physical location
), it will simply
have no positional data – and we treat it as a non-moving, abstract node (it could be assumed at a fixed
location or omitted from spatial calculations).

Enumerations and Constants: In addition to the fields above, our implementation will define certain
enums  and  constants  for  clarity:  -  MotionSource  enum  for  PlatformDefinition  (values:

UNKNOWN_SOURCE, SPACETRACK_ORG, FLIGHTRADAR_24, ... )
. -  CdpiProtocol  enum for

SdnAgent (values: at least  UNKNOWN, AIRFLOW  as per proto)
, though we won’t act on these

beyond  storing  them.  -  NetworkInterface.Mode  enum  (with  values  like  PROMISCUOUS,  

NON_PROMISCUOUS )
 – relevant when we simulate packet reception, but in Scope 1 it’s simply stored

if provided. - Possible constants for node and platform types (we might define Go const  or string lists

for known types like "SATELLITE" , "GROUND_STATION"  to avoid typos when comparing types).

By structuring data models this way, we ensure  schema alignment with Aalyria’s APIs, making it
possible  to  ingest  scenario  definitions  directly  from  their  protobuf/JSON  formats  with  minimal
translation
. The data classes can be populated from parsed proto messages (e.g. using Aalyria’s
definitions in api-main ), and likewise we could easily produce telemetry or state outputs in the same

format. This fidelity to the source schema is intentional to ensure compatibility and to set the stage for
implementing the NBI/SBI gRPC interfaces on top of our simulator.

Simulation Time Controller Design

The Simulation Time Controller provides a unified mechanism to advance and control simulated time.
It supports both real-time progression and accelerated (or stepped) time, as well as pause/resume
semantics
. Below is the design for this controller:

Tick Mechanism: We use a tick-based loop where each tick represents a fixed simulation time
increment (default 1 second of simulation time per tick). In real-time mode, the controller uses a
wall-clock timer to emit ticks in real seconds. In accelerated mode, it runs ticks as fast as possible
(or on a scaled schedule). For example, if accelerating 10×, each real second corresponds to 10
simulation seconds, so ticks might still emit every real second but the simulation time jumps by
10s each tick. Alternatively, in a fully offline mode, we might not wait at all – simply increment
time in a tight loop to cover long durations quickly.

Real-Time vs Accelerated Mode: These modes are configured at start. In real-time mode, the
controller aligns the simulation clock with actual time progression (e.g., using time.Sleep  or

ticker to ensure each sim-second aligns to one wall second)
. This mode is useful when
the simulation is connected to live systems or for demonstration. In  accelerated mode, the
controller disregards wall clock (aside from perhaps yielding to avoid locking the CPU) and
continuously issues ticks until a target simulation end-time or scenario duration is reached. We
can also allow an intermediate mode: e.g. scaled real-time where you run at 2× or 5× speed, etc.,
by shortening the sleep between ticks.

34

35

42

27

52

66

3

67
9

• 

• 

9
68

10


--- Page Break ---

Pause/Resume Implementation: The controller maintains an internal state flag. On Pause() ,

it can suspend the tick loop – if implemented with a ticker channel, we can stop or ignore ticks; if
a manual loop, we can break out or wait on a condition. Pausing should freeze the simulation’s
advancement: the current simulation time is remembered, and no further tick updates occur
until resumed. On  Resume() , the loop continues from the last simulation time. We must

ensure that when resuming real-time mode, we realign if necessary (the simulation time might
lag wall time if paused; upon resume, it could either skip ahead to current wall time or simply
continue  from  where  it  left  off  –  the  latter  is  simpler  to  implement  and  avoids  time
discontinuities in simulation). For accelerated mode, pause/resume is straightforward since wall
time is not tied to sim time.

Synchronization and Threading: The time controller will likely run in its own goroutine. It sends
tick events (perhaps the current simulation timestamp) to other components. We can implement
this with channels (a channel of time.Time  or a custom TickEvent struct) or with a subscriber

list that the controller iterates. Using channels has the advantage of backpressure (if consumers
are slow) but could complicate multiple consumers. A simple design: maintain a list of subscriber
callbacks  and  call  them  sequentially  each  tick.  Given  Go’s  goroutines  are  lightweight,  an
alternative is to have the time controller broadcast on a channel and each subscriber runs its
own goroutine reading from that channel (via fan-out pattern). For Scope 1, a simpler approach
is  fine:  lock  a  subscriber  list,  and  on  each  tick  do  for  each  subscriber:  call  

subscriber(simTime) .

Time Representation: Internally, simulation time can be represented as an absolute timestamp
(e.g. Go’s time.Time ) or as an offset (e.g. seconds since simulation start). It’s often convenient

to pick a start epoch (possibly the real current time when simulation begins, or a user-provided
start time). We will represent simulation time as a real timestamp to easily interface with orbital
propagators (which expect epoch-based times for TLE propagation). For example, if a TLE’s
epoch is in UTC, providing an actual datetime to SGP4 is natural. We may allow the scenario to
specify a start time (e.g. “start the sim at 2025-01-01T00:00:00Z”) or default to now. The controller
will then initialize currentSimTime = startTime . Each tick, it increments this by the tick size

(e.g. 1 second). This means if accelerated, the time.Time  will jump faster than wall time. (We

should be careful to use UTC and a monotonic source for delta calculations, to avoid timezone or
NTP issues.)

Controlling Tick Duration: The tick duration itself could be configurable. While 1-second steps
are  a  good  default  for  many  networking  scenarios,  some  use  cases  might  require  finer
granularity (e.g. if we needed sub-second event timing) or larger steps (for long-term orbit
simulation with less detail). We can allow the step to be set (as step  in Start). For example, a

10-second step would update positions every 10 sim-seconds – which might be acceptable for
slower dynamics like GEO satellites. The time controller doesn’t inherently know what step is
“safe”;  it’s  up  to  the  user/config  to  choose  one  that  balances  simulation  accuracy  and
performance.

Event Hook for Each Tick: After updating the simulation clock, the Time Controller triggers the
tick event. We can define that the Orbit Propagation module is subscribed to these events. The
ordering of updates each tick in Scope 1 is not too critical since only orbits are being updated. In
later scopes, ordering might matter (e.g. update positions, then update links, then routing, etc.).
For now, the controller could simply notify all subscribers in the order they were added. We’ll
ensure the Knowledge Base updates from the orbit module are effectively atomic per tick (likely
using locking inside KB) so that when tick processing is done, the state is consistent.

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

11


--- Page Break ---

Termination Condition: If the simulation is meant to run for a certain duration or until a certain
simulation end-time, the controller should check each tick whether the goal is reached (e.g. run
for 24 simulated hours then stop). It could also support an explicit StopTime  configuration or

just rely on an external stop call. In interactive use, we expect Stop()  to be called by the user

or test when they want to halt the sim.

Pause/Resume Semantics: Pausing the simulation freezes the simulation time. No tick events will be
sent while paused, meaning no platform positions update either. From an external perspective, the
whole system appears halted. Resume will continue from the same sim time it paused at (unless
configured to catch up). We do  not auto-adjust for missed real time on resume because that could
introduce a large jump; instead, we treat simulation time as a controlled timeline. If real-time syncing is
important, an alternate strategy is needed (like when resuming, jump sim time forward by the wall-
clock gap to realign). We will document this: e.g. “when paused, simulation time stands still”.

Example: If we start at sim time 00:00:00 and run in accelerated mode, after 10 ticks the sim time is
00:00:10. If we then pause for 5 real seconds and resume, the next tick will advance to 00:00:11 (not
00:00:15). In real-time mode, if we pause and resume, we might accept that simulation falls behind real
time by the pause duration.

In summary, the Time Controller ensures a consistent time base for the simulation and drives periodic
updates
. Its design emphasizes flexibility (real vs accelerated) and control (pause/resume) so that
one can, for instance, fast-forward through a scenario or hold the state at a critical moment for
inspection. This component will be implemented first, as other modules (orbit, etc.) depend on it to
progress.

Orbit Propagation System

The Orbit Propagation system is responsible for computing platform positions over time. It consists of
the SGP4 integration for satellites and the generalized motion model abstraction that can handle static
or externally updated positions. Key aspects of the design:

SGP4 Integration Strategy

We will integrate an SGP4 library to propagate satellite orbits from TLE data
. The strategy is to
create a thin wrapper around the chosen SGP4 implementation to fit our interface: - At scenario
initialization, for each orbital platform we parse the TLE (Two-Line Element set) strings to get an SGP4
“satellite” object. - We store this object (or relevant orbital parameters) in the platform’s MotionModel
(Orbital  model).  -  On  each  tick,  when  UpdatePosition(simTime)  is  called  for  that  model,  we

compute the position at the given simulation time.

The time passed to SGP4 needs to be in the proper format (usually minutes or days since the TLE
epoch). We will likely use the time.Time  difference between simTime and the epoch of the TLE to get

the elapsed minutes. The SGP4 library then returns position (and velocity, if needed) in an Earth-
centered inertial frame (TEME). We convert that to ECEF: - We compute the Earth’s rotation angle
(Greenwich sidereal time) at simTime and rotate the inertial coordinates to ECEF. The details of this
conversion can use known formulas (or possibly the library provides ECEF coordinates directly). -
Alternatively, use a higher-level library (like Orekit or others) that handles these frames under the hood
to directly output lat/long or ECEF.

• 

69

12
11

12


--- Page Break ---

We will validate SGP4 outputs with known cases (e.g. ISS TLE position at a given time) during testing to
ensure correctness. The integration will be encapsulated such that if we later switch libraries (say from a
Python binding to a pure Go one), the rest of the code doesn’t change – only the MotionModel
implementation does.

Performance considerations: SGP4 is very fast per computation (microseconds to milliseconds), so even
for large constellations (hundreds of satellites) computing each tick is feasible. We should be mindful if
using cgo or external calls to not create excessive overhead per tick (maybe batch updates if needed or
reuse objects). For now, a straightforward per-satellite call per tick is fine.

Platform Motion Abstraction (Strategy Pattern)

As  mentioned,  each  platform  has  a  MotionModel.  We  define  concrete  strategies:  -

StaticMotionModel  –  holds  a  fixed  coordinate.  Its  UpdatePosition  simply  might  ensure  the

platform’s  coordinates  remain  the  same.  (No-op  or  maybe  just  set  coordinates  to  initial  in  case
something overwrote it – but likely no change). - OrbitalSGP4MotionModel  – holds the parsed TLE

and SGP4 context. UpdatePosition computes new coords via SGP4 and updates the platform. This
model may also handle if the TLE is updated: e.g. if new orbital elements are fed (perhaps via a future
API call), we update the internal SGP4 model. The model could also optionally compute an approximate
orientation for the satellite – not required, but we could set the platform’s orientation to, say, have Z-
axis  pointing  to  nadir  (Earth)  as  a  default  for  completeness.  -  ExternalMotionModel  (or

ScriptedMotionModel) – could hold a trajectory function or dataset. For instance, it may have an array
of (time, position)  waypoints or a function like pos = f(simTime) . UpdatePosition finds the

appropriate position for the current time. If times between waypoints, it could interpolate or simply
hold last known. Another variant is a LiveMotionModel that doesn’t compute anything but expects an
external process to update the platform’s coordinates asynchronously (perhaps by calling KB). In that
case, UpdatePosition might do nothing – it trusts that the coordinates field is being updated externally.
We should support at least a simple version: for example, a  scripted linear motion – e.g. an aircraft
moving along a straight line at constant speed. We can implement that easily to demonstrate non-
orbital moving platforms.

The strategy pattern here allows adding new motion types (e.g. a future high-fidelity orbital integrator,
or a ground vehicle driving on a map) without modifying the core simulation loop – just by introducing
new MotionModel classes and assigning them to platforms
.

We will provide a factory that, given the platform’s data, returns the appropriate MotionModel: 

func NewMotionModel(p *PlatformDefinition) MotionModel {

if p.motion_ref_id != "" {

// Could indicate external motion control; return an 
ExternalMotionModel

}
switch p.motion_source {
case SPACETRACK_ORG:

return new OrbitalSGP4Motion(p.tleData)

case FLIGHTRADAR_24:

return new ExternalMotionModel("adsb")

default:

// If coordinates are given but no specific source, likely static
if p.coordinates != nil {

17

13


--- Page Break ---

return new StaticMotionModel(p.coordinates)
}
return new StaticMotionModel(defaultCoordinate)
}
}

This is a rough idea: for now, basically, if a TLE is present (or motion_source indicates orbit), we use
Orbital model; if motion_source or type suggests a plane ( FLIGHTRADAR_24 ), we might set up a

placeholder External model; otherwise default to Static for ground. We interpret motion_ref_id  as a

hint that an external process will update the motion (meaning we assign an External model or
something that doesn’t propagate on its own).

All MotionModel implementations will have access to the platform object so they can set the platform’s

coordinates  (and possibly orientation). Alternatively, they could return a new coordinate and the

Orbit module then sets it in the KB. We’ll likely do in-place update with proper locking via KB API.

Supporting Different Position Sources

Static Platforms: e.g. a ground station at a fixed latitude/longitude. We will likely input such
positions as lat/long/alt in scenario definitions. We need to convert to ECEF coordinates for
internal use (since our simulation uses ECEF universally
). We’ll implement a utility to
convert geodetic (lat, lon, altitude) to ECEF (x,y,z) using WGS-84 Earth model. This is done at
initialization. After that, the static platform’s coordinates (x,y,z) don’t change. We may store the
original lat/long for convenience or output, but ECEF is authoritative internally. 
Orbital Platforms: require initial TLE data. The scenario might directly provide the TLE lines for a
satellite. If using Aalyria’s API, a PlatformDefinition might not embed the TLE text but could
reference a motion source (like SPACETRACK) and norad_id. In our open-source context, we
expect the user can supply TLEs. We’ll design a way to input them (perhaps in textproto scenario
format, include the TLE string or a reference). For Scope 1, it’s simplest to allow directly setting
the TLE in the config. Our PlatformDefinition class can thus have a tle_lines [2]string  or

similar field (not in proto, but for our internal use) which the simulation uses to initialize the
SGP4 model.
External/Scripted: For example, if we have an aircraft, we might not have a TLE but maybe a list
of positions over time or a simplistic kinematic model. We can support a basic pattern such as
constant velocity motion: if provided a starting point and velocity vector, update position =
previous + v*dt each tick. Another example: a circular trajectory for a drone around a point.
These can be custom-coded for demonstration. But since the requirements explicitly mention
using live ADS-B or predefined trajectories eventually
, we ensure our design can incorporate
that. In Scope 1, perhaps we include a dummy “circular path” model to show extensibility (for
testing). Or we simply stub external models by keeping them static unless externally changed.

All positions will be maintained in ECEF coordinates in the PlatformDefinition, which simplifies line-of-
sight calculations later and avoids dealing with moving reference frames
. Orientation will also be
stored in a consistent reference (e.g. as quaternion relative to ECEF axes). If needed, we can provide
utility to get a platform’s lat/long at any time by converting ECEF to geodetic (for logging or output).

The Orbit Propagation system publishes or pushes the updated positions into the Knowledge Base.
After each tick’s updates, the Knowledge Base holds the latest coordinates for every platform (and thus
implicitly  for  every  attached  node).  This  up-to-date  spatial  info  will  later  be  used  by  connectivity
computations. In Scope 1, we don’t have link computation, but we can at least demonstrate retrieving
positions (for telemetry output or simple checks like distance between two satellites). 

• 

70
71

• 

• 

13

72

14


--- Page Break ---

Orientation Handling: While not a focus in Scope 1, we store orientation in the PlatformDefinition’s
Motion to not lose that detail. For satellites, one might assume they maintain some orientation (e.g.
nadir-pointing or some inertial attitude). We will not simulate dynamic attitude changes. If needed, we
can set an initial orientation (like identity or a default yaw/pitch/roll). Ground stations might have
orientation relevant if they have antennas (e.g. pointing up). We could set ground station orientation to
point towards sky (like align local Z-axis with local vertical). But these are cosmetic at this stage; there
are no pointing computations yet. We just ensure the field is there for future use (like when modeling
antenna gain patterns in a direction, etc.).

Testing the Orbit Module: We will incorporate known test cases such as verifying that a satellite at
epoch time is at the expected position (which for TLE is often 0 error by definition). Another test:
simulate a full orbit period and ensure the position roughly repeats (for a closed orbit). This will be
discussed more in the Test Strategy, but designing the orbit system to be testable means isolating the
SGP4 computation (maybe allow dependency injection of a fake propagator for unit tests) and being
able to run it for known scenarios. 

In conclusion, the Orbit Propagation system ensures each platform’s real-time position is reflected in
the simulation knowledge base
. It abstracts the motion logic so that adding a new type of
moving object or changing how we propagate orbits doesn’t impact the rest of the system. By using
strategies and a central update loop triggered by time ticks, we fulfill the requirement of periodically
propagating orbits and updating coordinates as time progresses
.

Knowledge Base (KB) Design and Concurrency

The  Knowledge Base is the in-memory data store that holds all simulation entities and their latest
state. It plays a critical role in Scope 1 by keeping platform positions and node info updated and readily
accessible
. The design focuses on thread-safe access, efficient reads for possibly frequent queries,
and support for change observation.

Data Storage Model

We will implement the KB likely as a singleton struct (or package-level object) for simplicity. Internal
data  structures  include:  -
 platforms  map[string]*PlatformDefinition  
-
 nodes
 

map[string]*NetworkNode

These maps allow O(1) lookup by ID. The values are pointers so that updates to a PlatformDefinition
(like  its  coordinates)  are  reflected  wherever  that  object  is  referenced.  We  must  be  careful  with
concurrency though – if multiple goroutines access these, we need locking when mutating or possibly
when reading mutable fields.

We also maintain linking info: - Each NetworkNode will have a platform_ref  as described. We may

also want a reverse map: platformToNodes map[string][]*NetworkNode  to quickly find all nodes

on a given platform. This is useful if, for instance, when a platform moves we want to update all
attached nodes. However, in our current design, a node doesn’t have its own position field independent
of the platform (we consider node position = platform position if linked). So we might not need to
separately update nodes; we can derive on the fly. But for completeness, having that mapping could
help if we later need to iterate nodes by platform. - Alternatively, we skip a reverse index and just iterate
all nodes when needed (since number of nodes likely in same order of magnitude as platforms, this is
fine).

42
7

73

4

15


--- Page Break ---

We will also incorporate any necessary indexing or filtering mechanisms for listing, if needed (e.g. get
all satellites vs all ground stations – can be done by filtering on the type field, not by separate storage).

No external database is used in Scope 1, but we keep the design such that one could swap the storage
with a persistent DB or an in-memory database if needed later (this is low priority now).

Concurrency Handling

To handle concurrency: - We will use a read-write lock ( sync.RWMutex ) to protect the maps. This

allows multiple concurrent reads (list, get) without blocking each other, but writes (add, update) will lock
exclusively. This is a simple and effective strategy given the operations. During each simulation tick, the
orbit updater will perform writes (position updates) potentially to many platforms – we can choose to
lock per platform update (fine-grained) or lock once and update all then unlock. The latter ensures a
consistent snapshot at the tick boundary but could block readers slightly longer. The former yields more
concurrency but with overhead of many lock/unlock cycles. Considering typical usage (reads for queries
can happen often, writes happen every tick perhaps hundreds of ms apart in real-time mode or tight
loop in accelerated), either approach could work. We lean towards a coarse lock for simplicity: on a tick,
lock KB, update all necessary fields, then unlock. In between ticks, reads can happen freely. The
overhead is negligible for tens or hundreds of platforms updated per tick. - We must avoid data races:
e.g. if a user thread calls ListPlatforms()  while a tick thread is mid-update. Using locks as above

prevents that. In tests, we will use Go’s -race  detector to ensure safety. - Another approach is copy-

on-write or snapshotting: for instance, each tick produces a new copy of platform state and swaps it.
That’s more for functional programming style and not needed here due to overhead. Instead, we
ensure proper locking and perhaps document that external consumers should use provided API (which
does locking) rather than accessing the maps directly.

For observing platform/node state, concurrency is also a concern: if observers are called from within
the update (hold lock and call out), that could deadlock or slow things if observers then call back into
KB. We must design carefully: - One pattern: collect all changes, release lock, then notify observers. For
example, orbit module updates positions for all platforms, it could accumulate a list of “changed
platform IDs” or new values, then after releasing KB lock, loop through those and send out notifications.
- Or we make a copy of relevant data and send it under lock if sending via channel (to avoid external
modification). - The simplest is to do notifications outside the locked section to avoid blocking the KB for
long. We’ll implement it accordingly: update state under lock, build events, unlock, then deliver events.

APIs for Reading and Writing

We  enumerated  main  APIs  under  Module  Breakdown,  but  to  reiterate  in  design  terms:  -  Write
Operations: -  AddPlatform(p) : Lock KB for writing, ensure  p.id  not exists, then insert into

platforms  map. Potentially also initialize platformToNodes[p.id] = [] . If the platform has an

initial  coordinate  and  motion  model,  we  might  also  call  Orbit  module  to  register  it.  -

AddNetworkNode(n) : Lock, check  n.id  unique, insert into  nodes . If  n.platform_ref  is set,

verify the referenced platform exists. Optionally append the node to that platform’s list (or just skip if
not maintaining reverse map). Also, perhaps set a back-pointer: e.g. platform might list its attached
nodes.  -
 UpdatePlatformPosition(id,  newCoords) :  Lock,  find  platform,  update  its

coordinates  field. Optionally record a timestamp of last update. Unlock. Then maybe trigger notify. -

We may not need a generic UpdateNode  yet as not much changes for a node in Scope 1 aside from

maybe  marking  storage  usage  or  such  (which  we  are  not  simulating).  -  Read  Operations: -

GetPlatform(id) : Lock for reading (or use RLock), retrieve pointer. The caller should treat it as read-

only (or clone it) to avoid data races; in internal code we might just use pointers and assume no
modification outside KB. - ListPlatforms() : RLock, copy or slice out all PlatformDefinitions (to avoid

16


--- Page Break ---

holding lock while external code iterates). Possibly deep-copy if external code might modify, or at least
copy pointers. - Similarly, GetNode  and ListNodes . - We might provide convenience queries, like

GetNodePosition(nodeID) : This would get the node, check if  platform_ref  is set, get that

platform’s coordinates and return them. This is read-only and can be done under RLock easily. This
could simplify external components that want a node’s location without doing two lookups. It’s not
strictly necessary but helpful.

All API methods will ensure thread safety internally. We will document that external users should not
bypass these (e.g. not iterate the maps directly) unless they handle locking.

Observing State Changes (Subscriptions)

To allow other parts of the simulator (or even external clients) to react to changes, we will include an
observer/subscribe mechanism: - An Event  could be a struct like {Type string; ID string; 

OldValue interface{}; NewValue interface{}; Timestamp time.Time}  or simpler, or we can

have  specific  event  types  (e.g.  PositionUpdated{platformID,  newCoord} ).  -  We’ll  provide

Subscribe(fn  EventHandler,  filter  FilterOptions)  where  FilterOptions  might  allow

subscribing only to certain events (like only position updates, or only certain entity types). In Scope 1,
we might not implement filtering beyond perhaps “platform updates” vs “node updates”. - Under the
hood, we maintain a list of subscriber callbacks similar to the tick listeners. Each time an entity is
changed, we notify. However, as noted, we should release the main lock before invoking callbacks to
avoid blocking the KB. - If thread-safety of events is a concern (e.g. an event contains a pointer to the
new  PlatformDefinition),  we  can  copy  the  relevant  data  in  the  event  so  the  subscriber  gets  an
immutable snapshot. But since the update just happened and no further change will occur until next
tick, giving the pointer is not entirely unsafe if they only read it. To be safe, though, we might give a
copy of the coordinates or so to avoid any concurrency issues if they read while another tick might start
updating  (in  accelerated  mode,  this  could  be  concurrently  happening  if  the  subscriber  is  slow).
Alternatively, document that subscribers should quickly handle the event or make their own copy.

Potential uses of subscriptions: A logging component could subscribe to all position updates and
write them to a file (telemetry output). A future connectivity module could subscribe to platform
moves to recalc link geometry immediately (or it might simply run each tick as well – either
model works). The subscription model is more asynchronous/event-driven which can be efficient
if updates are sparse or irregular, but since ours are periodic, polling each tick is equally viable.
Still, we design it for generality.

Consistency and Atomicity

We want the Knowledge Base to present a coherent view of the system state at each simulation time.
That means: - During the middle of a tick update (say we have 100 satellites and we’ve updated 50 of
them but not the rest), no external read should see some updated and some not (that would be a half-
consistent state for the tick). By locking around the whole update loop for all platforms, we ensure that
any read either sees the state before tick or after the tick, not in between
. - This atomic tick update
might temporarily block reads, but typically a tick update (SGP4 calculations etc.) might take a few
milliseconds  even  for  many  satellites,  which  is  fine.  If  it  became  a  performance  issue,  we  could
subdivide locks by grouping or allow some stale reads (depending on needs), but likely unnecessary. - If
an external thread (like an API call) adds or removes an entity concurrently with a tick, that’s another
scenario. We can choose to handle scenario changes (like adding a platform during run) carefully.
Possibly we freeze adding entities while simulation is running or allow it but with lock protection. For
scope 1, dynamic addition is probably not needed (scenario is static once started). If we allow, it just

• 

74

17


--- Page Break ---

means the KB lock will serialize those with ticks. We’ll mention that adding entities at runtime is
supported but not common.

Aligning with Aalyria KB concept

Spacetime’s  knowledge  base  concept  is  that  all  these  entities  (platforms,  nodes,  links,  etc.)  are
accessible and queryable via an API
. Our KB is an internal version of that. We’ll provide in future
scopes an API (gRPC) to query these, but for now, a developer can use the KB’s methods directly in tests.
The design ensures we can later implement the ListEntities RPC by simply calling ListPlatforms  etc.

and formatting results in the Entity message format.

Example Usage: Suppose we have a simulation with two satellites and one ground station. The orbit
module, every tick, updates the satellites’ PlatformDefinition coordinates. After each tick, a subscriber
(maybe a debug logger) gets events like “Platform X new position: {x,y,z}”. Meanwhile, an external query
could call GetPlatform("Sat1")  and get its latest position. The concurrency design guarantees that

that query won’t see a partially updated position vector (like an X from old tick and Y from new tick –
impossible since it’s one struct updated in one go under lock).

Garbage Collection: If in later use we remove entities, we need to clean up references. For now,
removal is not a primary concern (scenarios are typically fixed set of entities). We may implement a

DeletePlatform(id)  and DeleteNode(id)  for completeness, which would also remove linkages

and notify, but it’s optional in Scope 1.

By  implementing  the  Knowledge  Base  with  these  considerations,  we  fulfill  the  requirement  of
maintaining an internal knowledge base of all platforms and nodes with their IDs, names, types, and
continuously updating coordinates
. This KB underpins everything else, allowing other modules to
retrieve current positions, and providing a single point to integrate with APIs or UIs for scenario
inspection.

Test Strategy

To ensure each part of Scope 1 works correctly and to facilitate Test-Driven Development (TDD), we
outline a comprehensive testing approach. Tests will be written for each module (unit tests) and for
integrated behavior of the system with multiple entities. Where possible, we will use known reference
data (for orbital calculations) to validate correctness.

Unit Tests by Module

Platform & NetworkNode Models: -  Construction and Field Access: Create sample PlatformDefinition
and NetworkNode objects (both through constructor functions and by unmarshaling example proto
messages, if available). Verify that all fields are set correctly and can be retrieved. For instance, ensure
that if we set a Platform’s name and type, those fields read back properly. - Linking Node to Platform:
Create a Platform and a Node, set the node’s platform_ref  to the platform’s ID. In the test, verify

that we can resolve that link (e.g. by a helper function in KB or Node like node.GetPlatform(kb)

returning the correct Platform). We might provide a test helper to simulate attaching a node to a
platform and ensure that position inheritance logic will work (see integration tests below for actual
movement). -  Default Values: If certain fields are optional and not provided, ensure they default to
expected values. E.g., if no motion_source is given for a satellite but a TLE is present, we might default

motion_source  to  UNKNOWN  or  SPACETRACK.  If  no  orientation  is  given,  ensure  orientation  is

identity. Tests can construct minimal objects and ensure no nil pointers issues etc. - While these data

5
6

4

18


--- Page Break ---

classes are simple, it’s still useful to verify their integrity especially after operations (like no unexpected
changes).

Knowledge Base: - Add/Get/List: Write tests to add a few PlatformDefinitions and NetworkNodes to the
KB and retrieve them. Example: Add Platform “sat1”, Node “node1” attached to “sat1”, and Node “node2”
unattached. Then: - GetPlatform("sat1")  returns the correct object (same pointer that was added).

- GetNetworkNode("node2")  returns correct node. - ListPlatforms()  returns a list containing at

least the one we added (size matches count). Similarly for nodes. - Test that listing doesn’t expose
internal mutability issues (e.g., if we modify the returned object, does it affect KB? Depending on
implementation, we might have to copy; our test can enforce that if we decide to copy). - Thread Safety:
We  can  simulate  concurrency  in  tests  by  using  goroutines.  For  instance,  start  a  goroutine  that
continuously reads from KB (get or list in a loop) while another goroutine updates positions or adds
entities, and run for some time to see if any data races are reported (Go’s  -race  flag will detect

concurrent unsynchronized access). We expect none if locks are used properly. - Subscribe Notifications:
Register a dummy subscriber that records events into a slice. Perform a known update (e.g., add a
platform, or update a platform’s position through KB API). Verify that the subscriber was called with the
appropriate  event.  For  example,  update  Platform  “sat1”  position,  expect  an  event  of  type
“PositionUpdated” with ID “sat1”. We can also test that multiple subscribers receive events and that
unsubscribing stops receiving further events. -  Link integrity: If we maintain the  platformToNodes

mapping, test that adding a node with platform triggers the mapping update (like KB’s internal list of
node IDs on that platform includes the new node). If a platform is removed (if we implement removal),
test that nodes are handled (maybe also removed or marked stale). - We might also simulate an error
case: attempt to add two platforms with the same ID and ensure KB returns an error or panic is
avoided. Same for duplicate node ID. Our design said we’d error out; tests should confirm that.

Time Controller: - Tick timing in Real-time Mode: This is tricky to unit test precisely without waiting in real
time, but we can simulate by using a small tick interval (say 100ms) and measuring intervals. Or use a
fake  clock  if  we  abstract  the  time  source  (could  be  overkill).  At  least,  we  test  that  after

Start(realTime=true)  with a given tick interval, the controller produces roughly the expected

number of ticks in a given time. We can allow a tolerance since OS scheduling might not be exact. -
Alternatively, abstract the time dependency using an interface so we can inject a deterministic ticker in
tests. For example, an interface Ticker { C() <-chan Time; Stop() } , which normally wraps

time.Ticker  but in tests we use a manual channel to send ticks. This adds complexity, though. -

Simpler: run  Start(realTime=false)  (accelerated mode) with a loop for N ticks and ensure it

completes in much less wall time than N seconds (meaning it’s faster than real-time). -  Accelerated
progression: Configure a simulation start at time T0, with accelerated mode. After X ticks, check that

Now()  returns T0 + Xstep. That ensures the simulation clock is advancing correctly. For example, start at

00:00:00, tick 10 times with step 1s, confirm Now() == 00:00:10. - Pause/Resume: Start the controller (maybe
accelerated to avoid waiting). Let it tick a few times, call Pause(), wait a short period (or a few loop iterations),
ensure no ticks were emitted during the pause (we can have a counter increment in the tick listener to see if it
stopped increasing). Then call Resume(), ensure ticks resume and the simulation time continues from where
paused (not jumped). Specifically, record sim time at pause, then after a couple ticks post-resume, confirm it
equals pause_time + couplestep. - Subscriber management: If using callbacks for ticks, test that adding a
listener works (it gets called), and removing it stops receiving calls. Could add two listeners that append
to two lists, run a few ticks, and ensure both lists have entries. Then unsubscribe one, run more ticks,
ensure one list stops growing while the other continues. - Also test Stop() : after stop, no further ticks

happen even if we try to resume (stop might implicitly pause permanently). Possibly also ensure that
calling Stop properly terminates the tick goroutine (which is hard to test directly, but we can test that a
listener no longer gets ticks after stop). - If time controller uses an internal channel, we test no resource
leaks (goroutine should exit on Stop; we can use a sync.WaitGroup or a channel to signal done and wait
in test to verify).

19


--- Page Break ---

Orbit Motion Models: -  Static Model Test: Create a StaticMotionModel with a known coordinate (say
ECEF for some point). Call UpdatePosition at a series of times (or in a loop) and verify that the platform’s
coordinate remains exactly the same. No floating drift, etc. If orientation is part of Motion, verify it stays
same too. - Orbital Model Test (Basic): This requires a sample TLE. Use a well-known TLE (e.g. for the ISS).
Use our OrbitalSGP4MotionModel to propagate to two different times. If possible, cross-check the
results with an authoritative source: for instance, the SGP4 library itself, or published position. One
approach:  the  Python  sgp4  library  or  another  reference  can  give  position  which  we  embed  as

expected result. Or simpler, ensure that two calls yield two different positions and the difference is
plausible. For example, propagate at epoch (should match the TLE’s stated position vector if we could
get it) and epoch + 1 minute – the ISS moves ~7.5 km/sec, so ~450 km difference; we can check the
distance between points is ~450 km. Also check something like altitude remains ~400 km (by computing
sqrt(x^2+y^2+z^2) - EarthRadius). - Another test: propagate a full orbital period in steps and ensure the
path is continuous (we could check that no two consecutive points are too far apart given a small step,
indicating continuity). - Edge cases: propagate far from epoch (e.g. several days beyond TLE epoch,
though SGP4 accuracy might degrade – but just see that it returns something reasonable). Also test
behavior  if  the  TLE  is  malformed  (we  should  handle  parse  errors  gracefully  –  maybe  our  model
constructor returns an error which KB or scenario loader would catch; we test that error path). - Orbital
Model vs Static Check: If a platform is erroneously set with static model but it has a TLE, obviously that’s a
misconfiguration. We can have tests to ensure our factory chooses correct model given inputs: e.g.
provide a PlatformDefinition with motion_source=SPACETRACK  or a TLE, verify NewMotionModel

returns an OrbitalSGP4MotionModel, not a Static. -  External Motion Test: If we implement a simple
trajectory model (say linear motion), test that over ticks it produces expected positions. For example,
start at (0,0,0) with velocity (1,0,0) m/s; after 10 one-second ticks, expect position (10,0,0). If using Earth
surface points, maybe test an aircraft moving east at certain m/s and check after known time. - If we
implement a model that reads from a predefined waypoint list: simulate a list and ensure interpolation
works. - If we have a Live external model stub (that does nothing on Update), we can test that external
update  actually  changes  position.  For  example,  set  up  an  ExternalMotionModel,  manually  call
KB.UpdatePlatformPosition to mimic an outside update, then verify that the position changed even
though UpdatePosition did nothing on that tick (meaning the KB update itself is what changed it, which
is expected).

Precision and Frame: A subtle test is to ensure Earth-centric distances are correct. For one, test
that a static ground station at lat/long (0,0) alt 0, after converting to ECEF, has magnitude ~Earth
radius (~6371 km). If altitude = 0, |ECEF| should equal Earth radius. For another location, maybe
test the convert latlon->ECEF->latlon returns the original (within tolerance). This validates our
coordinate conversion.
Orientation consistency: If we set orientation default (like identity quaternion), test that it remains
a unit quaternion if we propagate (should, since we likely never change it). If we ever decide to
set an orientation for satellites (say pointing to Earth), we could test that the satellite’s
orientation vector is indeed pointing roughly towards Earth’s center vector (dot product positive,
etc.).

Integration Tests (Multi-Component)

Scenario Simulation Test: Construct a small scenario programmatically: e.g. - 2 satellites (Sat1, Sat2)
with known TLEs (perhaps different orbits), - 1 ground station (GS1) at a fixed location, - 1 network node
per platform (Node1 on Sat1, Node2 on Sat2, Node3 on GS1). Start the simulation (maybe accelerated to
run quickly) for a certain number of ticks (say simulate 1 hour with 10-second ticks, meaning 360 ticks).
During the run, collect data and then assert certain conditions: - Sat1 and Sat2 positions change over
time in a smooth orbit. For example, record their altitude at each tick and ensure the variation is within
expected  bounds  (i.e.,  roughly  periodic  for  an  orbit).  Specifically,  altitude  should  remain  roughly

• 

• 

20


--- Page Break ---

constant  for  a  circular  orbit  or  oscillate  between  perigee  and  apogee  if  elliptical,  but  not  drift
unboundedly. - The distance between Sat1 and GS1 should drop below a threshold at some point if the
orbit passes overhead (if we choose TLE such that it does). Or simpler: check that GS1 coordinates
remain constant and Sat1’s coordinate moves; maybe find the minimum distance between Sat1 and GS1
over the hour and assert it’s reasonable (like not zero unless we expect a pass directly overhead). - Verify
that Node1 (on Sat1) always “follows” Sat1’s platform position. Since we might not explicitly store node
positions, this can be indirectly tested: we know Node1’s platform_ref = Sat1. We can query KB each tick
for Node1’s platform’s coordinates and ensure it matches Sat1’s coordinates (basically a consistency
check in code rather than a property of the code – because by design it should always match as it’s the
same object – but this test just ensures our node linking logic isn’t broken). - If we had any external
update, e.g. we could simulate an external event: after half the simulation, manually update GS1’s
position (imagine we “moved” a ground station, even though unrealistic). Then ensure subsequent ticks
respect the new position. But moving ground station might not be a normal operation – perhaps skip
this scenario unless testing external injection. - Ensure no platform’s position goes NaN or Inf (this can
be tested by checking all coordinates are finite numbers after simulation). - The Knowledge Base at end
of simulation should list exactly those 3 platforms and 3 nodes we created, with final positions. - If
logging enabled, perhaps verify that some expected log entries appear (e.g. "Tick count" or certain
events).

Time Controller & Orbit Integration: We should test that the time controller and orbit propagation
work in tandem. For example: - Use a short simulation with known tick count and ensure that orbit
updates happened that many times. We can insert a counter in the MotionModel or use log events: e.g.
have the orbit model log each update. Then assert that the count of updates equals number of ticks (for
orbital and static models alike). - Test pause with orbit: e.g. run simulation, pause, during pause maybe
manually change something or wait, then resume, ensure that during pause the orbit did not update
coordinates (i.e., positions remained frozen), and upon resume they continue from where they left off.
This might involve checking that the coordinate at pause and after a pause gap (with no ticks) is
identical, then after resume the next coordinate is updated normally.

Validation Strategies (Physical & Logical Invariants): - Altitude Bounds: For each platform with an
orbital model, verify that its distance from Earth’s center is within a reasonable range based on its orbit.
If we know the TLE or orbit, we can compute expected perigee/apogee. Or at least check it stays above
Earth’s radius (no decaying below ground) and not way too high (unless it’s supposed to – but if we use
a known LEO TLE, altitude ~ 6771 km from center for ISS, check it stays ~6771 ± maybe few tens of km).
If we see a huge drift, it could indicate a time or frame error (like if we forgot to convert time units
properly). - Ground Station Position Drift: Check that any static platform’s coordinates do not change
throughout the simulation (a simple equality check initial vs final). This ensures our static model truly
doesn’t introduce numerical drift. - Orbital Periodicity (for regression): If feasible, simulate a satellite
for the duration of one orbit (e.g. ~90 minutes for LEO) and verify that its final position is close to initial
(SGP4 won’t be exact due to perturbations not modeled in simple two-body, but it should be quite
close). This can catch errors in time stepping or using wrong epoch: e.g. if we accidentally advanced
time incorrectly, after one orbit the satellite might not come back around as expected. - Node Integrity:
If a node is not attached to any platform, confirm that it being “isolated” doesn’t break anything. For
example, one of our scenario nodes might have no platform (like an infrastructure node). Ensure that
simulation runs without needing to update or access a null platform. Essentially, confirm that our code
either skips or handles nodes with no platform gracefully (they simply have no position update). We
might assert that such a node remains present in KB and can be listed, and maybe has some default
state. If we decide to give unlinked nodes a dummy static coordinate (maybe not), then test that if we
do, it remains constant. - Time Controller Accuracy: For long simulations in accelerated mode, ensure
that the number of ticks * tick duration equals the total simulated time elapsed (within off-by-one if you
count final state). This is more of a consistency check on time progression. For example, run 1000 ticks

21


--- Page Break ---

of 1s step, verify simulation clock advanced 1000 ±1 seconds. This catches any cumulative error in how
we increment time or if we accidentally dropped/added an extra tick.

Resource and Performance Checks: Not a strict requirement, but we can include tests or at
least measurements to ensure that adding more platforms linearly increases tick processing
time and no memory leaks. For instance, simulate 1 satellite vs 100 satellites for a few ticks and
measure time per tick to see if roughly linear. Also, run a simulation for many ticks and ensure
memory usage is stable (no unbounded growth – implying no accumulating slice or event
backlog). This can be done manually or with test instrumentation rather than an automated unit
test.

Test-Driven Development Approach

We  will  write  tests  alongside  implementing  the  modules,  often  writing  the  test  first  (e.g.  define
expected behavior of TimeController in a test, then implement minimal code to pass it). This ensures
each feature is well-defined and verifiable. For example, before coding the pause logic, write a test that
calls pause and expects no further ticks, etc., then implement until it passes. This approach is feasible
because our modules have clear, separable responsibilities: - We can use a fake tick emitter to test Orbit
Propagation in isolation (simulate calling UpdatePosition with incrementing times). - We can simulate a
fake MotionModel to test the Time Controller’s callback mechanism (e.g. a dummy listener that flips a
flag on tick). - We will create stub SGP4 outputs for testing if needed (to avoid dependency on actual
orbit library in pure unit tests – but integration tests will use the real library to ensure it works as
expected with actual data).

By thoroughly testing each part, we can confidently combine them. When we run full scenarios in
integration tests, any discrepancy (like a node not updating or a data race) should surface, and our unit
tests should help pinpoint which module might be the culprit.

Error Handling, Metrics, and Logging

Even in Scope 1 (with no external networking effects yet), robust error handling and observability are
important. We outline the design considerations for how the system will react to errors and produce
logs/metrics:

Error Handling Design

Initialization Errors: These include invalid scenario configurations. For example, if a
NetworkNode references a platform ID that is not defined, the simulator should log an error and
either (a) create the node without a platform (assuming maybe it’s intentional but platform
definition missing) or (b) fail scenario loading. We likely treat it as a scenario definition error and
halt initialization with an error message to the user (since it’s better to catch such mismatches
early). This could be implemented by the scenario loading function validating that every 

node.platform_ref  has a matching platform in KB.

Other init errors: Malformed TLE string (cannot be parsed by SGP4). In that case, for Scope 1, we
have two options: fail the simulation start for that satellite (because orbit can’t be propagated),
or mark that platform as static (no motion) as a fallback. It’s safer to notify the user. We will likely
propagate the error (e.g. the function that adds the platform returns an error “Invalid TLE for
platform X”). The user (or higher-level API) can decide to remove or replace it. Logging this
clearly is important too.
Runtime Errors:

• 

• 

• 

• 

22


--- Page Break ---

SGP4 Propagation Errors: SGP4 itself typically doesn’t “throw” errors for time ranges, but if we
propagate extremely far from epoch, the results might be nonsense. If the library indicates an
error (some libraries provide an error code if orbit decay or bad epoch), we should catch that. At
runtime, if a propagation fails, what to do? We can log a warning “Propagation failed for SatX at
time T (maybe TLE outdated)”. We might then skip updating that platform for this tick (leaving its
last known position). Since the simulation can continue without one satellite updating (though
connectivity results might be off for it), we prefer to continue rather than crash. So catching
exceptions or error codes from the propagator and converting to log messages is the plan.
Time Controller Errors: Not many – perhaps if an invalid configuration is given (negative tick
interval or scale), we can default or error. If the ticker goroutine panics (it shouldn’t normally), we
wrap it in a recover to log and stop gracefully.
Concurrent Modification Safety: If someone tries to modify a PlatformDefinition from outside
the KB (which is against design), it could cause issues. We cannot easily prevent a determined
user messing with pointers, but in our own code, we avoid that. We rely on code discipline rather
than try to enforce immutability of PlatformDefinition (could do with copying, but that’s heavy).
Interface and Unused Field Handling: If scenario inputs contain fields we don’t support (like
trying to set an interface’s promisc mode or a transceiver frequency), we will accept them but log
a debug note that they are not used. This way the user knows those fields are essentially ignored
in the simulation. E.g., “NOTE: power_budget defined for node X is not enforced in this
simulation scope
”.

Out-of-scope  Actions: If  an  API  call  tries  to  do  something  not  available  yet  (e.g.  call  a
connectivity query in Scope 1), we might return a “Not Implemented” error or stubbed result. For
internal design, since we haven’t implemented those features, we likely won’t have such API to
call at all, but it’s something to keep in mind as we develop further scopes.

Graceful Degradation: Because we want the simulation to keep running even if some parts fail,
we adopt a strategy of failing soft where possible:

If one platform’s update fails in a tick (e.g. one bad TLE), we handle that error, mark that platform
as “failed this tick” (maybe keep its old position) and continue updating others. We then also
possibly raise an event or flag that something is wrong with that platform. The simulation
continues and others are fine.

If Knowledge Base experiences an error (like an impossible condition), that’s more severe. But
our KB logic is straightforward; main possible error is duplicate IDs or missing references, which
we handle at scenario load.

Panics and Recovery: In Go, we try not to panic except on truly unrecoverable issues. But since
this might run as a long-lived service, we could use recover in the top-level simulation loop to
catch any panic, log it, and perhaps stop the simulation gracefully. For example, wrap the tick
loop in a defer-recover so if any unforeseen bug causes panic, we output stack trace to log and
terminate the sim rather than crash the whole process (especially if integrated in a server). For
development, we might let it panic so we notice and fix, but the design acknowledges the need
for resilience.

Metrics

We will integrate basic metrics instrumentation so we can monitor performance and state: - Tick Rate
Metrics: e.g. a counter for ticks executed, perhaps measure tick processing duration (histogram or
gauge for last tick duration). This can show if tick processing is real-time safe or if accelerated mode is

• 

• 

• 

• 

58

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

23


--- Page Break ---

hitting any limits. - Platform/Node Counts: Metrics for number of platforms and nodes loaded (and
maybe subdivided by type, e.g. number of satellites vs ground stations). These can be set at scenario
load or updated if dynamic. -  Propagation metrics: If using Prometheus or similar, we might add a
counter for propagation errors or out-of-bounds (to alert if, say, many TLE errors occur). -  Latency
metrics for control-plane (though we assume negligible in Scope 1) – might skip now, but place
hooks for later (like measure how long it takes from issuing a command to node acknowledging, if we
had that). - Resource usage (if we had internal instrumentation): We can measure memory usage
periodically or just rely on external observation. Not typically part of app metrics, but we can track, for
example, the length of event queues if any (ensuring we’re not building up backlog).

Given that we might use Prometheus client in Go as suggested
, we would design our code with
metric collection in mind. For example, after each tick, update a gauge sim_time_seconds  = current

simulation  Unix  timestamp  (so  external  observer  sees  what  sim  time  it  is  now).  Or  count

sim_ticks_total++  each tick. Also measure and record if any tick fell behind schedule in real-time

mode (if we find that the loop couldn’t keep up real-time, that could be a metric or log warning).

Logging

Logging will be designed to be structured and with adjustable verbosity
: - We will likely use a
structured logger (in Go, e.g. logrus  or zap  or even the built-in with some format) that can output

key=value pairs. Each log entry can include simulation context like current sim time, module, entity IDs,
etc. - Startup logs: On simulation start, log the scenario summary: number of platforms, nodes, start
time, mode (real-time or accelerated), tick interval. - Per-tick logs: We will not log every tick at info level
(that would be too verbose at 1Hz). We can log every Nth tick or at debug level if needed. Instead, key
events are logged: - If running real-time, and a tick was delayed (maybe GC pause caused a delay), log a
warning “Tick X delayed, simulation falling behind real-time by Y seconds” – just for performance
monitoring. - We can log when transitioning states: e.g. “Simulation paused at sim time T”, “Simulation
resumed”, “Simulation stopped”. -  Platform updates: We may enable a debug log that logs new
position of each platform each tick, but that’s huge for many platforms. Instead, perhaps log at info
when a platform is added or removed, and log at debug a formatted position occasionally. Alternatively,
rely on telemetry output rather than logs for continuous data. For Scope 1, maybe an option to turn on
orbit debug logging. - Event logging: If a notable event occurs (like a satellite passes over ground – but
we aren’t computing that yet in Scope 1), we might log it. For now, events might be: - Detection of an
error as discussed (invalid TLE, out-of-range propagation). - When hitting a stubbed feature: e.g. if a
node’s power budget is exceeded. In Scope 1 we’re not actively computing power usage, but say we had
a test where we pretend a node uses some power and it goes over budget – we would log "Power 

budget exceeded for Node X: using YW > budget ZW (not enforced)
" . This aligns with

the plan to log or ignore in stubbed cases rather than enforce
. - Similarly, if storage capacity would
be exceeded, we might log a warning (though we have no data flow to cause that yet). - Subsystem
tags: Each module can log with a tag, e.g. [TimeCtrl] Simulation started , [Orbit] Sat1 

position updated lat=..., lon=... , [KB] Added Platform Sat1 . This helps filter logs by

module. - Logging SDN agent info: As all nodes are considered SDN-enabled by default, we could log
that once: e.g. "Node X SDN agent type: AIRFLOW, control latency: none (negligible in this scope)" to
acknowledge the config
. - Configuration logging: Dumping the initial scenario config in the log
can help debugging. Perhaps log each entity loaded (id, type, any special fields like altitude or TLE
snippet). - Error logs: Any caught exception or error should be logged at WARN or ERROR level with
enough detail. E.g., if SGP4 returns an error code, log “ERROR: Failed to propagate orbit for [Sat1] at
time ... (possibly decayed)”. - Metrics logging: If not using Prometheus in a test environment, we might
periodically log metrics ourselves. For example, each minute of real time, log how many ticks executed,
or how many seconds of sim time covered per real second (useful in accelerated mode to see speed-up
factor achieved).

75

75

58

58

54
76

24


--- Page Break ---

All logs should avoid flooding. We will use levels appropriately (DEBUG for per tick details, INFO for
high-level  progress,  WARN  for  recoverable  issues,  ERROR  for  severe  issues).  We  also  ensure  that
sensitive or large data (like full interface lists) aren’t dumped repeatedly.

In summary, the design for errors, metrics, and logging is to fail loudly on config errors, fail softly on
runtime  errors,  and  to  provide  transparency  through  logs  and  metrics  about  the  simulation’s
operation. This will greatly assist a developer or user in understanding what the simulator is doing and
in diagnosing any issues that arise.

Sample Scope 1 Scenario Definitions

To illustrate the capabilities of Scope 1 (Core Entities & Orbital Dynamics), here are example scenario
components that a user might define and the expected simulation behavior. This scenario includes a

mix of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites, a Geostationary (GEO) satellite, and ground assets:

LEO Satellite – “SatLeo1”:
PlatformDefinition: ID "sat_leo_1" , name "LEO-1" , type "SATELLITE" . Motion defined by

a TLE (two-line element set) for a ~500 km altitude polar orbit. For example, a TLE indicating ~95-
minute orbital period, inclination ~90°. We set motion_source = SPACETRACK_ORG  (meaning

we use TLE propagation)
 and provide the TLE lines in the config. Orientation is left default
(nadir-pointing assumed).
NetworkNode: ID "node_leo_1" , name "LEO-1 Node" , type "SATELLITE_NODE" . This

node is attached to platform "sat_leo_1"  (so platform_ref = "sat_leo_1" ). It might

have a routing_config with a router ID (placeholder), and perhaps a power_budget of e.g. 100 W
constant (we include this in the definition to demonstrate the field, though we won’t enforce it)
. Storage could be set, say 1 MB ( storage.available_bytes = 1e6 ) to mark DTN

capability (again not actively used yet, but noted)
. The node could also have one or two
NetworkInterface entries (say an RF interface for space links and maybe an optical interface as a
placeholder) – but no links are defined in scope 1, so these serve as stubs.

Expected  Behavior: The  simulation  will  propagate  “SatLeo1”  along  its  orbit.  Every  tick,  its  ECEF
coordinates update, moving rapidly around Earth. Over ~95 minutes of sim time, it completes a full
orbit. The attached node “node_leo_1” effectively moves with it (any query for node’s position at time T
would fetch the platform’s coordinates). No connectivity is calculated, but we can later use its position to
determine when it passes over ground stations, etc. If power budget or storage are exceeded in any
hypothetical operation, we would just log a warning (but since no traffic in scope 1, that likely won’t
occur).

LEO Satellite – “SatLeo2”:
Another LEO satellite to demonstrate multiple orbiting objects. Platform ID  "sat_leo_2" ,

perhaps different orbital plane (e.g. inclination 45°, or different RAAN). Provide a TLE for this as
well (maybe a slightly higher orbit ~700 km).
NetworkNode  ID  "node_leo_2"  attached  to  "sat_leo_2" .  Similar  settings:  type

“SATELLITE_NODE”, maybe a different router ID. This node’s presence shows we can handle
multiple moving platforms concurrently. Both orbits will be propagated each tick.

GEO Satellite – “SatGeo1”:
PlatformDefinition: ID "sat_geo_1" , name "GEO-1" , type "SATELLITE" . Motion via TLE for

a geostationary orbit (approx 35,786 km altitude, 0° inclination). The TLE would have period
~24h. Set motion_source = SPACETRACK_ORG  as well.

• 

27

58

63

• 

• 

25


--- Page Break ---

NetworkNode: ID "node_geo_1" , name "GEO-1 Node" , type "SATELLITE_NODE" . Attached

to "sat_geo_1" . This node might represent a bent-pipe transponder, for example. We could

give it a bent_pipe_payload in the platform definition to illustrate that field (e.g. one payload with
certain frequency bands). Again, in Scope 1 that’s just stored data.

Expected Behavior: “SatGeo1” will appear nearly stationary relative to Earth in the simulation (its ECEF
coordinates might change slightly due to orbital eccentricity or drift, but ideally if we use a perfectly
geostationary TLE, it will remain roughly fixed over a longitude). This tests that our propagation can
handle 24h period orbits and that the time step (if 1s or so) doesn’t accumulate significant error for
GEO. The node “node_geo_1” remains at that fixed location as well. If we had a ground station under it,
we’d later see constant coverage, but that’s for later scopes.

Ground Station – “GS1”:
PlatformDefinition: ID "gs_1" , name "GroundStation-1" , type "GROUND_STATION" . This

platform has a static position. For example, lat = 0°, lon = 0° (on the equator near Gulf of Guinea),
altitude = 0. We convert that to ECEF coordinates at init. We set motion_source = 

UNKNOWN_SOURCE  (since it’s manually positioned) or we could leave it unset. This platform won’t

move (we assign a StaticMotionModel). We could also include a category_tag  like 

"GROUND_SITE"  for UI grouping.

NetworkNode: ID "node_gw_1" , name "Gateway-1" , type "GROUND_STATION_NODE" .

Attached to "gs_1" . This node might have a subnet field (e.g. subnet = ["10.0.0.0/24"]

indicating it connects a certain network) just to populate that field. It might also have an agent

(SDN agent) field indicating it’s SDN-controlled (type AIRFLOW). Power budget could be high or
not set for a ground station (could assume mains power, so not limiting). Storage maybe 0 (no
DTN for this gateway, or maybe yes if it’s DTN gateway – either way is fine to show usage of
field).

Expected Behavior: “GS1” stays fixed at its ECEF coordinate (on Earth’s surface). The simulation will
maintain its position constant through all ticks (the static model ensures no drift). We can verify that
satellites periodically come into view of this ground station by post-processing their relative geometry
(not computed by the simulator in scope 1, but if we output positions we can analyze if SatLeo1 passes
above horizon at GS1, for instance). The node “node_gw_1” doesn’t move either since it’s tied to GS1. It’s
essentially an endpoint on the ground. 

User Terminal – “UT1”: (Optional in scenario)
We can include a user terminal as another ground or maybe airborne asset. For example, a
platform "ut_1"  type "USER_TERMINAL" , which could be static at some other location (or

moving car, but that would require a trajectory – perhaps keep static for now). Attach a node

"node_ut_1"  type "USER_TERMINAL_NODE" . This demonstrates another category. It might

have limited power (say battery powered, so power_budget of 50W). We set storage maybe a few
MB to indicate DTN capable (like a handheld device that can store messages). This terminal could
be placed at a different lat/lon than GS1 to represent an end-user device location. If static, it
behaves just like GS1 (no motion). If we wanted to test motion, we could make UT1 move along a
simple path: e.g. if it’s an aircraft, we could assign a scripted trajectory model. For example, UT1
at lat 10°, lon 0°, moving north at 200 m/s (if it were a plane). We can simulate that with
ExternalMotionModel by updating its lat/lon each tick or having a preset function. But to keep it
simple, let’s assume UT1 is fixed on the ground for now, to focus on primary use-cases.

Infrastructure Node – “InternetGateway”: (Optional node without platform)
To illustrate a node with no physical platform, define a NetworkNode ID "node_inet_1" , type

"INFRASTRUCTURE_NODE"  (meaning  it  represents  a  point-of-presence  or  core  network

• 

• 

• 

26


--- Page Break ---

gateway). This node’s platform_ref is unset (nil). In the scenario, this might represent the distant
internet – not a physical thing in our simulation. It could have a routing_config (like router ID)
and maybe connect to GS1 via a terrestrial network (not modeled in scope 1 except as a
conceptual  existence).  This  node  will  have  no  PlatformDefinition  entry.  The  simulation  will
include it in the KB, but it won’t have coordinates. In any outputs or future connectivity logic, it
would only connect via non-spatial links. For now, it tests that we can handle nodes with

platform_ref = nil .

Expected Behavior: The simulation doesn’t attempt to update any position for this node (since none
exists). It remains just an entity in the KB for completeness. There should be no errors from it being
present. Queries for its position might return “none” or an error – but we likely won’t query a non-
physical node’s position in scope 1.

With these definitions, a solo developer can set up the scenario as a combination of PlatformDefinition
and NetworkNode objects (perhaps build them from JSON or directly in code). When the simulation
runs: -  Time progression: If run in real-time mode, one could start it and let it run for (say) a few
minutes, observing that LEO satellites complete several orbits relative to the ground. In accelerated
mode, one could simulate a full day in a short time – verifying the GEO satellite stays roughly fixed
above GS1, while LEO ones periodically go in and out of range if one were to check. - Data inspection:
The developer can call ListPlatforms()  at any time to get current positions. For instance, after 45

minutes sim time, SatLeo1 might be on the opposite side of Earth from GS1 (depending on orbit).
Although we’re not computing connectivity, one could manually compute if needed by checking line-of-
sight. -  Logging/Output: The logs would show entries like: “Platform sat_leo_1 added (LEO satellite,
orbit via TLE)”, “Platform gs_1 added (Ground station, static)”, etc. On running, logs (if debug enabled)
might show tick updates: “T+60s: sat_leo_1 at (x,y,z)=..., sat_geo_1 at ... (should be nearly initial), gs_1
at ... (constant)”. - No connectivity yet: Indeed, this scenario does not include link definitions, so the
simulator just maintains these entities as isolated points with positions
. This is expected for Scope 1
– it lays the groundwork; in Scope 2, one would add interfaces and links between (e.g. a link from
node_leo_1 to node_gw_1 representing a satellite downlink, etc., and then simulate when that link is
active based on geometry).

This scenario demonstrates the mix of LEO, GEO, and ground: - LEO satellites moving quickly, - a GEO
satellite seemingly fixed, - a fixed ground station, - and possibly a stationary user terminal and a non-
physical network node.

A developer can use this setup to verify the system: e.g., print out SatLeo1’s latitude/longitude over time
to see it moving; ensure GS1’s position remains constant; ensure no errors occur linking node_inet_1
(no platform) in the KB, etc. It provides a solid test that our core entities and orbital dynamics are
functioning as intended.

With this implementation plan, a solo engineer can proceed to develop each module in isolation
(following the outlined interfaces and responsibilities) and write tests for each. The design adheres to
Aalyria’s Spacetime data model and meets all Scope 1 requirements: defining core entities, updating
their positions over time (via SGP4 for orbiting platforms)
, maintaining a knowledge base of
state, and preparing the system for subsequent network-centric features. Each component can be built
and tested independently, and combined to run a basic constellation simulation scenario as illustrated
above.  The  result  is  a  clear  and  extensible  foundation  upon  which  the  more  advanced  Scopes
(connectivity, scheduling, etc.) can be layered. 

77

12
73

27


--- Page Break ---

Sources:

Aalyria Spacetime API Protobufs for PlatformDefinition and NetworkNode (for data model
alignment)
Project Requirements and Roadmap documents (Scope 1 goals, assumptions, and
simplifications)
Architecture Overview for simulation design principles (time controller, orbit propagation,
knowledge base concept)

Architecture for a Spacetime-
Compatible Constellation Simulator.pdf

file://file_000000000ac47207829eeb8ec2dd94b2

Roadmap for Spacetime-Compatible Constellation
Simulator Development.pdf

file://file_00000000f1147207bb22409abe0e8599

Architecture for a Spacetime-Compatible Constellation Simulator.pdf

file://file_00000000b25871fa90417933660bf5d3

nbi.proto

https://github.com/aalyria/api/blob/320219aaa62ccf75690e5633ccfbef77748ddd0b/api/nbi/v1alpha/nbi.proto

platform.proto

https://github.com/aalyria/api/blob/320219aaa62ccf75690e5633ccfbef77748ddd0b/api/common/platform.proto

Requirements for an Aalyria Spacetime-Compatible Constellation
Simulator.pdf

file://file_0000000084507207a89cd89149e01fa2

network_element.proto

https://github.com/aalyria/api/blob/320219aaa62ccf75690e5633ccfbef77748ddd0b/api/nbi/v1alpha/resources/

network_element.proto

• 

20
36
78
79

• 

35

• 

75
80
8

1
5
6
8
9
10
11
13
14
15
16
67
68
69
71
72
74
75
80

2
4
7
12
17
33
34
35
42
45
58
65
73
77

3

18
19

20
21
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
70

22
23
40
54
55
63
64
76

36
37
38
39
41
43
44
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
56
57
59
60
61
62
66
78
79

28

